--- PAGE 1 ---
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
2003, 35 (2), 334-342
Measuring icon complexity:
An automated analysis
ALEX FORSYTHE, NOEL SHEEHY, and MARTIN SAWEY
Queen’s University, Belfast, Northern Ireland
Measures of icon designs rely heavily on surveys of the perceptions of population samples. Thus,
measuring the extent to which changes in the structure of an icon will alter its perceived complexity
can be costly and slow. An automated system capable of producing reliable estimatesof perceived com-
plexity could reduce development costs and time. Measures of icon complexity developed by Garcia,
Badre, and Stasko (1994) and McDougall, Curry, and de Bruijn (1999) were correlated with six icon
properties measured using Matlab (MathWorks, 2001) software, which uses image-processingtechniques
to measure icon properties. The six icon properties measured were icon foreground, the number of ob-
jects in an icon, the number of holes in those objects, and two calculations of icon edges and homo-
geneity in icon structure. The strongest correlates with human judgments of perceived icon complexity
(McDougall et al., 1999) were structural variability (r 5 .65) and edge information (r 5 .64).
s s
Small pictorial images, known as icons or symbols, are recently, Giannini, Giannini, and Condon (2000) found that
ever-present in our society; they are used anywhere that the presentation of symbolic slides during lectures facili-
language can be used to facilitate the communication of tated improvements in the test scores of students.
information. Although the terms icon and symbol are often It may be that the memory capacity for pictures is al-
used interchangeably, there are some subtle differences. most limitless (Harber & Hershenson, 1973; Standing,
Icons often have a physical connection to a particular tar- 1973), but the value of an icon or symbol depends largely
get or function, whereas symbols are more arbitrary in on the effort required for an accurate interpretation of its
nature and often have an indirect relationship to their ref- meaning. The possibility of creating an unlimited number
erents (Fenk, 1998; Horton, 1994). Yet, the use of the of icons means that the potential for communication fail-
word icon to describe symbols—particularly on computer ure is high. In attempting to address this problem, the In-
screens—is so pervasive that it is probably irreversible ternational Organization for Standardization (ISO) has set
(Horton, 1994). a minimum recognition rate of 66.7% (Lindgaard, Ches-
There are distinct advantages to the use of pictorial im- sari, & Ihsen, 1987; Piamonet, Abeysekera, & Ohlsson,
ages for communication.Pellegrino, Rosinski, Chiesi, and 2001), but reports of recognition rates as low as 29% point
Siegel (1977) reported that when two objects belong to the to difficulties in meeting the ISO criterion (Davies, Haines,
same category, pictures depicting them are processed Norris, & Wilson, 1998; Piamonet et al., 2001).
faster than words. Information is also conveyed more di- The development of design guidelines, informed by
rectly through the use of images; pictorial road signs are contributions from several disciplines, including engi-
understood easily and accurately and are learned more neering, ergonomics, and psychology, represents another
easily than word signs (Walker, Nicolay, & Stearns, 1965). approach to the development of effective icons. There
There is also strong evidence that symbols and icons are have been comprehensive reviews of the principal ideas
more easily identified and better remembered. In tasks in- underpinning icon theory (Easterby & Zwaga, 1984; Hor-
volving recall, participants have been able to correctly ton, 1994; Maguire, 1985) and ISO publishes a broad spec-
identify 85%–95% of a set of previously presented graph- trum of recommendations regarding the location of icons,
ical symbols, whereas recall for words was significantly including those pertaining to road vehicles (ISO, 1995)
lower, particularly in larger learning sets (Standing, 1973). and information technology (ISO, 2000a, 2000b, 2000c,
A similar advantage was reported by Muter and Mayson 2000d).
(1986), who found that error rates were halved when users Research into good icon design and usability has been
were presented with symbols rather than with text; more impeded by difficulties in measuring and controlling sym-
bol characteristics. Traditional methods involve the gen-
eration of large numbers of picture sets (Alario & Ferrand,
Supplementary material, including an appendix to this article, is avail- 1999; Rogers & Oborne, 1987; Sanfeliu & Fernandez,
able at http://www.psych.qub.ac.uk/research/projects/aia/. Correspon-
1996; Snodgrass & Vanderwart, 1980). Recently, Mc-
dence concerning this article should be addressed to A. Forsythe, School
Dougall, Curry, and de Bruijn (1999) used this method to
of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland
BT7 INN (e-mail: a.forsythe@qub.ac.uk). develop the first set of normative values for icons. This
Copyright 2003 Psychonomic Society, Inc. 334

--- PAGE 2 ---
MEASURING ICON COMPLEXITY: AN AUTOMATED ANALYSIS 335
and a subsequent study (McDougall, de Bruijn, & Curry, ally tractable through the use of an automated measure-
2000) have provided a common framework for the evalu- ment procedure.
ation of icon characteristics. McDougall et al. (1999) has reported on the success of
McDougall et al. (1999; McDougal et al., 2000) found one semi-automated system of icon measurement. Garcia,
three characteristics to be of primary importance in the Badre, and Stasko (1994) developed a technique based on
measurement of symbols and icons: concreteness, dis- a calculation of several icon features, including the num-
tinctiveness, and complexity. The degree to which an icon ber of closed and open figures and horizontal and vertical
could be considered concrete or similar to its real-world lines. This metric was developed primarily as a measure of
counterpart was found to be important to the initial under- icon concreteness, and, using this measure, Garcia et al.
standing of the icon. A more dynamic quality of icons— reported that icons that are pictorially similar to their real-
their distinctiveness—can help users identify and respond world counterparts are more likely to be judged as com-
to the messages they convey. Distinctiveness cannot be as- plex. Although there is some disagreement as to whether
sessed in isolation; it is contingent on the nature of the vi- icon complexity and icon concreteness are related con-
sual display in which an icon is located. The third charac- structs (McDougall et al., 1999), the high correlations be-
teristic, icon complexity, is reported to be important in tween the metric of Garcia et al. and the McDougall et al.
search efficacy. The amount of detail or intricacy within (1999) measures of icon complexity (r 5 .73) suggest
s
an icon influences the rate at which it can be detected, that the Garcia et al. measure of complexity is able to mea-
with very simple or very abstract icons being detected sure the amount of detail in an icon in a way similar to that
faster. Interestingly, icon complexity was found to be un- of human observers. However, Garcia et al.’s techniques
related to how concretely similar an icon was to its refer- are painstaking for all but the simplest icons. In the study
ent (McDougall et al., 1999; McDougall et al., 2000). reported here, it was considered whether a more auto-
Making major alterations to an icon—such as rescaling mated system could be used to quickly produce reliable
or inverting its black/white contrasts—will almost cer- estimates of perceived icon complexity.
tainly change the way the icon is interpreted. To what ex- Several theories point to the possibility of developing a
tent can designers change the structural properties of more computationally driven approach. First, it is gener-
icons without changing behavioral responses to them? ally accepted that the degree to which an icon is judged to
Currently, there are relatively few methods available to be concrete or similar to its target object is important in
predict behavioral changes from structural alterations. providing meaning to the user (Guastello & Traut, 1989;
One technique involves the iterative testing of modified McDougall et al., 2000; Mead & Modley, 1968; Schwartz
icons using samples drawn from populations of potential & Phillippe, 1991). It has been reported that there is not
users. User familiarity means, however, that different sam- necessarily a direct relationship between the icon dimen-
ples are required at each stage of the modification process, sions of concreteness and complexity (McDougall et al.,
and the designer is left to guess when it might be appro- 1999), but icons regarded as similar to their targets do tend
priate to engage in the costly and laborious process of nor- to be more detailed and explicit in nature (Arend, Muthig,
mative reassessment. Likewise, in the development of an & Wandmacher, 1987; Rogers & Oborne, 1987). This
entirely new icon set, the gathering of subjective judg- extra detail is of particular importance to the novice user
ments from users should occur throughout the design (see, e.g., Maguire, 1985; McDougall et al., 2000; Mead
process, particularly at the beginning and end of set de- & Modley, 1968; Raeder, 1985); for example, essential el-
velopment (McDougall et al., 2000). An automated sys- ements, such as the wings on an airplane or the handle on
tem would enable designers to check iteratively through- a suitcase, give more explicit meaning to an icon, thereby
out the design process, without the necessity of recruiting facilitating faster identification (Bruyas, Le Breton, &
large numbers of human raters. Pauzie, 1998). Other advantages of using icons that are
As a decision-making aid, an automated system would highly detailed in nature include the ability of designers to
make the process of icon development and modification a convey action information, such as when a physical object
less speculative, more cost-effective activity. requires manipulation (Figure 1) or in attracting the eye to
small details that can aid in recognition, such as the lug-
Why Should Automated gage label in Figure 2A.
Measurement Be Possible? This extra detail however, comes at a cost. Regardless
The characteristics of icon concreteness and distinc- of experience, more abstract icons—which are not neces-
tiveness are, to some degree, dynamic properties, in the sense sarily good examples of a prototype—may elicit faster re-
that the degree to which an icon is judged to be a concrete sponses than icons offering more concrete representations
representation is determined partly by an observer’s famil- (Arend et al., 1987; McDougall et al., 2000). One expla-
iarity with the target object or function. The distinctive- nation for this is that the observer seeks a functional ex-
ness of an icon will depend not only on its structural fea- planation for any additional icon objects; hence, process-
tures, but also on the visual landscape in which it is situated ing time increases (Bruyas et al., 1998; Nielson, 1993).
(McDougall et al., 2000). Judgments of icon complexity, Consequently, it takes longer to process the suitcase in
however, may be somewhat less sensitive to factors of user Figure 2A than that in Figure 2B. A further design feature
familiarity and visual context and may be computation- that can add to the complexity of an icon is the use of

--- PAGE 3 ---
336 FORSYTHE, SHEEHY, AND SAWEY
terior angles, different angles, and lines an image had, the
more likely it was to be perceived in three dimensions.
Gestalt grouping processes are also considered to be im-
portant in the perception of form; the largest area of an
image will always be considered background, with contour
and shape considered foreground (Hochberg & Brooks,
1960). Perhaps this explains why such grouping processes
are important in the perceptionof image complexity. For ex-
Figure 1. Count icon.
ample, a global-feature superiority effect has been reported
in the high-speed selection of icons, with responses to fea-
color. Color is useful in attracting the attention of the user tures such as size and shape being faster than those to the
and for organizing and grouping related icon concepts; structural detail of an image (Arend et al., 1987; Wand-
however, general advice is that, where possible, the use of macher & Arend, 1985). Psychophysicalevidence suggest-
color should be avoided. At best, color offers no advan- ing that higher order grouping processes operate in this
tage to user performance (Christ, 1977; Tullis, 1981), and way can be found in studies showing that the brain regis-
at worst it reduces the speed at which information is ters variations in an image as changes in intensity, and it is
processed (Biederman & Ju, 1988; Ostergaard & David- these coarse and fine changes that provide detail and local
off, 1985). Icons should be designed in black and white, information about a stimulus (Beck, Graham, & Sutter,
with color added only for improvement (Horton, 1994). 1991; Harwerth & Levi, 1978; Sutter, Beck, & Graham,
McDougall et al. (1999; McDougall et al., 2000) have 1989; Vassilev & Mitov, 1976). Coarse scales are thought to
reported that the level of complexity within an icon bears be treated by the brain as low-frequency components and
no direct relationship to the degree to which it can be con- are processed faster than high-frequency components ob-
sidered concrete or representative of its target. Concrete- tained from local information. This difference in processing
ness is related to the meaning implied by an icon, whereas speed would seem to be a function of image complexity:
complexity is related to recognition time. One explanation When an object is of a detailed nature, its global attributes
for this is focused on the impact of including additionalel- are processed much faster than its local ones (Hoeger,
ements in an icon (Horton, 1994; Nielsen, 1993). Many 1997; Parker, Lishman, & Hughes, 1997).
icons in common use are intended to convey information Although the theoretical positions underpinningfeature
about their targets and the operation to be applied to them. integration theory, Gestalt explanations, and psycho-
For example, an icon depicting a file held within a clamp physics research are all quite different, they all suggest
can be used to refer to a generic target (any file stored on that the measurement of icon complexity may be compu-
a computer) and the operation of compression. Depicting tationally tractable. If this is so, then it should be possible
both an object and an operation usually involves the inclu- to develop an automated system that would inform de-
sion of more elements to clearly communicate the in- signers about human estimations of users’ perceptions of
tended meaning. Additional attentional processes are in- icon complexity. Such a system could prove to be a useful
volved in building a cognitive representation of an icon, decision-making aid to designers who wish to create an
because of the need to integrate the greater number of entirely new icon set or make alterations to the properties
constituent elements. Simple image properties are ex- of an existing one.
tracted from an image in parallel, and these properties are
then combined to form objects of a particular shape, color, Method
and size (see, e.g., Treisman, 1986; Treisman & Gelade, Matlab (MathWorks, 2001) is an integrated commercial
1980; Treisman & Souther, 1985). package with powerful mathematical algorithms and vi-
An alternative explanation that lends itself to measure- sualization utilities for the acquisition, analysis, and ex-
ment consists in the Gestalt principles of figure/ground ploration of data. With its Image Processing Toolbox,
and minimum. These center on the way in which higher Matlab can be used to recover detailed structural infor-
order grouping processes and selective attention guide the mation from a black and white, grayscale, or color image.
ordering and recognition of image features. For example, The Toolbox has numerous image-processing functions
the law of simplicity suggests that, when viewing a com- and, on the basis of the theoretical explanations of icon
plex image, the human perceptual system operates selec-
tively to secure the most economical form (Hochberg,
1968; Hochberg & Brooks, 1960; Neisser & Becklen,
1975). Hochberg even went so far as to develop a semi-
automated measure of image complexity, arguing that re-
lying solely on human judgments of what makes an image
“complex” would mean that we have no way of predicting
just how advanced or simple an image will actually ap- A B
pear. His calculations demonstrated that it was possible to
predict how viewers would “see” an image: The more in- Figure 2. Luggage icon.

--- PAGE 4 ---
MEASURING ICON COMPLEXITY: AN AUTOMATED ANALYSIS 337
complexity reviewed above, six of these functions were ap- lab assigns diagonally connected pixels extra weighting.
plied to a random sample (n 5 68) of the McDougall et al. This is because the discreteness necessarily introduced by
(1999) icons. The function measures were correlated with the digital representation of an image means that a given
metrics developed by Garcia et al. (1994) and McDougall number of pixels arranged diagonally represents a longer
et al. (1999). High correlations would indicate similar mea- line than the same number of pixels arranged horizontally
surements of icon complexity. or vertically.
The Gestalt argument (Arend et al., 1987) that distinct A processing convention was then established to define
global features are important to perceptual speed was connections between pixels and, hence, an icon’s compo-
tested first. It was considered that the most global charac- nent parts. All pixels touching both horizontally and ver-
teristic of an icon would be its figural form, which was tically (but not diagonally)were considered to be connected.
calculated using a measure of icon foreground. High cor- This is referred to by Matlab as a 4-connected neighbor-
relations between this measure and the metrics of Garcia hood, and the difference between this and an 8-connected
et al. (1994) and McDougall et al. (1999) would indicate neighborhood can be observed in panels B and C of Fig-
that grouping principles are important factors in human ure 3 . Essentially, a 4-connected neighborhood produces
ratings of complexity. a finer image.
When preparing the McDougall et al. (1999) icon set for Four additional calculations were performed using this
processing, Matlab treats a black and white, or binary, convention.The feature integration of icon elements
icon as an array of 1s and 0s. This is essentially a data file (Bruyas et al., 1998; Nielson, 1993; Treisman, 1986) was
in which the image is stored as a matrix of pixels. On tested by counting the number of discrete objects within
white paper, black normally (but not always) represents each icon, an object being defined as a set of 4-connected
the foreground, and white represents the background. pixels. Figure 4 shows an example of the objects count;
Matlab, on the other hand, considers white to be an “on” the separate objects are shown in various shades of gray,
pixel, giving it the value 1, and black to be an “off ” pixel, and this icon received an object count of 14. The number
giving it the value 0. Thus, before any analysis was carried of holes within those objects was also counted by calcu-
out, the representation of all the icons in Matlab was re- lating the Euler number of the image. A negative Euler
versed, with 1s becoming 0s and vice versa. number indicates that the number of holes in the image is
Icon foreground is defined as the area taken up by pix- greater than the number of objects. It was considered that
els that are switched on (i.e., black on paper, but with the an icon rated as complex would contain more elements
value of 1 in the Matlab representation of the icon). Mat- than an abstract icon and that these elements would them-
A B C D E
Original Perimeter Perimeter Canny Quadtee
X8 X4
645 562 848 1255
379 246 427 754
334 239 365 562
Figure 3. Automated measures morphs with metric scores.

--- PAGE 5 ---
338 FORSYTHE, SHEEHY, AND SAWEY
tect may be included superfluously in a Matlab perimeter-
detection calculation.
To allow for both of these considerations,a further analy-
sis was performed using the Canny perimeter-detection
calculation. The advantage of the Canny method over
other perimeter-detection methods is that it works by
using two thresholds to detect strong and weak edges and
includes the weak edges in the output only if they are con-
nected to strong edges. This means that truly weak edges
Figure 4. Hierarchy icon.
will be detected in the analysis, but noise—such as shadow
or shading—will be ignored. The second icon in Fig-
selves be complex in nature, having more local detail (i.e., ure 3D (frog) is a good example of the power of the Canny
holes). analysis. Whereas the perimeter measures (Figures 3B
To test the importance of changes in image structure in and 3C) retain elements of shading and shadow in their
the perception of icon complexity, two perimeter-detection analysis, the Canny analysis retrieves a much more skele-
measures and one structural analysis was performed. If tal impression. Furthermore, since Canny is able to deal
structural variability were an important factor in the per- with grayscale and binary images, it is unnecessary to
ception of icon complexity, it would be indicated by high treat the data before processing.
correlations between these measures and the metrics of Finally, Quadtree decomposition examined homogene-
Garcia et al. (1994) and McDougall et al. (1999). Exam- ity in the icons. It works by iteratively subdividingthe icon
ples of how these various metrics affect an icon’s appear- into quarters; each subblock is then tested for homogene-
ance can be observed in Figure 3. ity. The subdivision continues until the resulting subblock
Perimeter-detection measures work by examining the is homogeneous; hence, a large number of small, homo-
changes in intensity that occur at the edges of an image. geneous blocks indicates a highly structured image (see
Edges are located using two criteria that examine areas in Figure 3E). A small number of largish blocks indicates a
the icon where there is a rapid change in image intensity. more homogeneous image.
Either a change in intensity must be larger than a prede-
termined threshold (perimeter detection provides a num- Results
ber of estimators that can be used to specify sensitivity) or The means, standard deviations, and skew for the cal-
an edge will be detected where the intensity derivative has culated icon characteristics are displayed in Table 1. Mc-
a zero crossing. For the purposes of this study, zero cross- Dougall et al. (1999) recorded two measures of complex-
ings occur at the places where negative and positive pix- ity for this icon set, one using the Garcia et al. (1994)
els are adjacent. For a pixel to be considered an edge pixel, metric and one involving subjective ratings. These scores
it must be activated (on) and connected to at least one non- are also included in Table 1.
activated (off ) pixel. This is a simplified version of more The distribution of scores for several of the measures
general detectors, such as Canny and Sobel, which calcu- was positively skewed at more than twice the standard
late the gradient of intensity values for close-by pixels in error. To correct this, a log transformation was performed
10
color or grayscale images. on the Garcia et al. (1994), Foreground, Objects, and
A limitation of this analysis is that thicker lines are Holes metrics. This transformation corrected the distrib-
awarded higher scores than thinner ones. This is because ution of data for these metrics; however, rudimentary
the perimeter calculation rates a thick line as having two analysis of the underlying data for these measures pre-
edges rather than one. The selection of a 4-connected neigh- sented some anomalies. Consequently, the corrected dis-
borhood compensates for this problem to some degree, tributions were artificially inflated for all but the Garcia
since it produces a finer image (see Figure 3C). However, et al. measures, and only the remaining ratings and this
an edge that might be blurred or difficult for a user to de- measure were correlated.
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for Icon Attributes
Metric M SD Skew Kurtosis
McDougall et al. (1999) complexity 2.75 .78 2 .31 5.8
Garcia et al. (1994) 9.33 9.31 2.05 2.33
Foreground 760.62 593.45 2.59 10.44
Objects 13.17 21.00 3.04 11.83
Holes 2.8 4.6 2.47 6.19
Perimeter 384.08 228.26 .859 2.06
Quadtree 733.82 396.32 .79 2.36
Canny 329.34 181.52 .65 2.79

--- PAGE 6 ---
MEASURING ICON COMPLEXITY: AN AUTOMATED ANALYSIS 339
Table 2
Spearman Correlations Between Icon Attributes
McDougall Garcia
Metric et al. (1999) et al. (1994) Perimeter Quadtree
McDougall et al. (1999) complexity 1.00
Garcia et al. (1994) .75* 1.00
Perimeter .64* .66* 1.00
Quadtree .65* .65* .94* 1.00
Canny .49* .60* .88* .84*
*Correlations significant at p , .0008.
Given the large number of analyses performed, a Bon- human judgments of icon complexity. For example, cal-
ferroni adjustment was applied and the criterion for sta- culations on objects within an icon are based on connec-
tistical significance was set at p , .0008. A caveat to this tions between pixels such that discrete objects will be de-
adjustment is that it greatly increases the likelihood of tected only when there are breaks between the pixels.
Type II error. Thus, because the nodes in Figure 5 are all linked by lines,
The analysis (Table 2) replicated the moderately strong our computational measures detect only one discrete ob-
correlations reported by McDougall et al. (1999) between ject. Feature integration theory contends that the human
their ratings of complexity and those of the Garcia et al. perceptual system is much more sophisticated than this,
(1994) metric. This supports the argument that they may with the nodes and lines of the hierarchy icon being ex-
be tapping similar constructs. tracted separately (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). Specifi-
The Garcia et al. (1994) and McDougall et al. (1999) met- cally, when an image is made up of more than one separa-
rics both correlated with the structural analysis (Quadtree) ble feature, individualfeatures are attended to and processed
score (r 5 .65, p , .0008) and with the perimeter- along independent dimensions (Treisman & Gelade,
s
detection score (r 5 .66 and r 5 .64, respectively; p , 1980). Thus, greater cognitive effort is involved in the in-
s s
.0008). The Canny correlations with Garcia et al. (r 5 .60) tegration of an icon composed of a number of separable
s
and McDougall et al. (1999; r 5 .49) are smaller but sta- elements than in that of an icon that is more integral in na-
s
tistically significant. These findings suggest that image- ture. According to this view, icon complexity is partly a
processing techniques can measure icon characteristics in function of the cognitive effort involved in making an
ways that approximate more time-consuming measures. evaluative judgment.
The correlations also suggest that ratings of icon com- If the problem of object identification was limited to a
plexity may be linked to homogeneity in image structure. few icons, this metric might still have proved a useful gen-
eral estimate of the perceived characteristics of icon prop-
Discussion erties. However, the problem is quite substantial: Fewer
Positively skewed distributions were observed for sev- than three objects were detected in almost 50% of the
eral of our measures as well as for the Garcia et al. (1994) icons we examined. Furthermore, changes to icons that we
metric. Skewed distributions are commonly caused by thought might have led to an improvement in object count-
sampling bias, nonnormal distribution of the characteris- ing produced disappointing results. For example, the icon
tics of the items being measured, or the sensitivity of the in Figure 6 depicts the concept debug. The different ob-
measurement tool. The first possibility can be discounted, jects detected by the objects metric are displayed in
because the sample of icons was randomly drawn from grayscale. If an 8-connected neighborhood convention is
those published by McDougall et al. (1999). The second applied (meaning that all touching pixels are considered
fails to explain why the McDougall et al. (1999) norms connected), the icon will receive a count of 30 (Fig-
are approximately normally distributed, whereas our mea- ure 6A). The problem is not rectified by applying a con-
sures and those of Garcia et al. are positively skewed: If vention that considers only pixels that are connected hor-
icon characteristics are not normally distributed, that izontally and vertically (a 4-connected neighborhood).
should be observed consistently. Although a more conservative count of 2 is obtained from
The third possibility suggests that enumeration meth- the metric (Figure 6B), the score is awarded for the entire
ods of the type used by Garcia et al. (1994) and by us yield image plus one rogue pixel (shown in gray). Furthermore,
positively skewed distributions because they are based on
the systematic application of rigorous definitions of icon
attributes. Stringent enumeration techniques would be ex-
pected to yield measures of icons that pile up on the lower
end of the scale, whereas the judgments of human ob-
servers are probably based on a less meticulous analysis
and produce a more normal distribution of scores. This is
supported indirectly by evidence indicating that many
image-processing measures yield poor estimates of Figure 5. Objects and holes metric.

--- PAGE 7 ---
340 FORSYTHE, SHEEHY, AND SAWEY
A B
Figure 6. Debug icon.
deletion of either the insect or the repellent from the icon more economical than using human raters for the same
without removing the rogue pixel would still produce an purpose.
object count of 2. Similar problems were encountered The foreground metric was even less effective at differ-
with many of the icons. entiating icon detail from icon foreground. Detail can be
The problems posed by this type of analysis arise from particularly important in providing function cues to the
the fact that icons consisting of multiple objects tend to user by drawing the eye to significant areas of information
have many touching pixels. A similar problem arises when within the icon (Horton, 1994). However, delineating
a count of holes is used as an estimate of icon complexity. areas that represent icon foreground from those denoting
Image-processing software can detect holes that may be icon detail is very subjective, as is illustrated by the icon
imperceptible to the naked eye, to the extent that even in Figure 7C. A simple measure of foreground is too crude
dense icons, such as the one depicted in Figure 5, often re- a proxy for the complex grouping processes involved in
ceived a hole count. In this case, the image-processing human perception, and it appears likely that this measure
software detected a single tiny hole. These examples il- is merely a sophisticated calculation of icon area, as rep-
lustrate that the skewed distribution of data was caused by resented by pixels that are switched on.
some fundamental properties of the way the software mea- More reliable metrics for estimating human judgments
sured the icons. As such, it could not be treated as a form of icon complexity are available in the Perimeter and
of measurement error, and, for this reason, a log trans- Canny perimeter-detection measures and the Quadtree
10
formation of the raw data was considered inappropriate. structural variability measure. These metrics yield distri-
Foreground was chosen as a possible measure of the butions that are much less skewed and that correlate
global features of an icon, but automated measurement strongly with the complexity ratings reported by Garcia
also proved difficult. The significantly skewed data sug- et al. (1994) and McDougall et al. (1999). They also point
gested that processes unlike those involved in the human to the potential importance of structural variability in
perceptionof figure and ground were in operation.Whereas judgments of icon complexity. As was previously noted,
it may sometimes be possible to treat black areas of an the structural variability in an icon is probably determined
icon as foreground, problems arise when this definition is by changes in intensity that occur at the edges of an image.
applied globally. For example, treating black areas as fore- Furthermore, the Quadtree analysis of image structure,
ground is acceptable when the simple icon in Figure 7A is which also correlates highly with the Garcia et al. and Mc-
being processed, but it is unsatisfactory when it is applied Dougall et al. (1999) measures, is based on changes in
to the analysis of the icon in Figure 7B. Although it would image intensity. Highly structured areas correspond to high
be possible to analyze icons on a case-by-case basis, adapt- numbers of small, homogeneous blocks, and these blocks
ing the algorithm accordingly, the procedure would be no collect around image boundaries. As is the case with the
A B C
Figure 7. Foreground metric.

--- PAGE 8 ---
MEASURING ICON COMPLEXITY: AN AUTOMATED ANALYSIS 341
Perimeter and Canny measures, these boundaries are areas why McDougall et al. (1999) found human judgments of
in which large changes in image intensity take place. icon familiarity to correlate negatively with their evalua-
These findings add support to the argument that a com- tions of icon complexity (r 5 2.31, p , .001): As ratings
s
plex image is one that has a large number of edges, and it of icon familiarity decrease, complexity tends to increase.
is these edges that slow down the perceptual process Computer-based algorithms should not be so influenced,
(Hoeger, 1997; Parker et al., 1997). Hummel and Bieder- and to determine whether this is the case, a sample of 70
man (1992) used contour deletion to make a similar point. icons was assembled, which consisted of all those rated as
They argued that perceptual slowdown might be caused unfamiliar (scoring ,3) in McDougall et al.’s (1999) data
by an inability to make a rapid semantic link between the set and judged to be very simple by our perimeter measure
icon and its target. Although semantic processing is not (scoring ,400). The association between the Perimeter
slow in and of itself, the physical properties that bind an measure of complexity and human judgments of familiar-
image must be processed before semantic access can ity is close to zero (r 5 2.05). Thus, automated measures
s
occur. This would also explain why differences in response of the visual complexity of an icon are unaffected by the
rates between complex and abstract icons do not change as semantic analyses that human observers cannot suppress
a function of learning (Arend et al., 1987; McDougall when judging icon complexity.
et al., 1999). Regardless of experience, a more detailed
object will take longer to reach semantic processing, be- Conclusion
cause the preprocessing of many edges is perceptually de- To what extent can designers change the structural prop-
manding. erties of icons without changing behavioral responses
to them? Decision-making aids based on the image-
Other Relationships processing measures reported here can significantly re-
Several of the automated measures correlated signifi- duce the degree of speculation involved in arriving at an
cantly with each other. In particular, the Canny analysis estimate. In practical terms, this means that a designer can
correlated highly with both the Perimeter and Quadtree modify any of the icons in the set published by McDougall
metrics. What difference there is between the measures is et al. (1999) and, using the Perimeter and Canny perimeter-
almost certainly due to the slightly different ways in which detection measures together with the Quadtree structural
Matlab implements each of the analyses. However, for variability measure, can accurately estimate its perceived
nonbinary images, such as colored icons and photographs, complexity without incurring the delays and expense as-
a Canny analysis could be extremely useful in removing sociated with a new usability validation study.
the effects of noise from a calculation.
A preliminary analysis suggests that these automated REFERENCES
calculations are reasonably robust, with all calculations re-
maining stable when the icons are rotated. When the icons Alario, F.-X., & Ferrand, L. (1999). A set of 400 pictures standard-
ized for French: Norms for name agreement, image agreement, fa-
are resized, counts of objects and object holes remain sta-
miliarity, visual complexity, image variability, and age of acquisition.
ble, but counts of Perimeter, Quadtree, and Foreground Behavior Research Methods,Instruments, & Computers, 31, 531-552.
areas will tend to vary with the degree of modification. Arend, U., Muthig, K.-P., & Wandmacher, J. (1987). Evidence for
global feature superiority in menu selection by icons. Behaviour & In-
formation Technology, 6, 411-426.
Complexity and Semantics
Beck, J., Graham, N., & Sutter, A. (1991). Lightness differences and
Although moderate to strong correlations were ob-
the perceived segregation of regions and populations. Perception &
served between the automated measures of icon complex- Psychophysics, 49, 257-269.
ity and human judgments, they were not perfect. The lack Biederman,I., & Ju, G. (1988).Surface versus edge-based determinants
of convergence is almost certainly due to the fact that the of visual recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 38-64.
Boucart, M., & Humphreys, G. W. (1992). Global shape cannot be at-
image-processing algorithms we applied to the icons are
tended without object identification. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
poor approximations of the more complex processes em- ogy: Human Perception & Performance, 18, 785-806.
bedded in human perceptual judgment. These algorithms Boucart, M., & Humphreys, G. W. (1995). Automatic access to object
do not process semantic information, whereas there is identity:Attention to global information, not to particular physical di-
mensions, is important. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
considerable psychophysical evidence that human ob-
Perception & Performance, 21, 584-601.
servers cannot process the structure of an image indepen- Boucart, M., & Humphreys, G. W. (1997).Integration of physical and
dently of its semantic content. Boucart and Humphreys semantic information in object processing. Perception, 26, 1197-1209.
(1992) used a sequential form-matching task to manipu- Bruyas, M. P., Le Breton, B., & Pauzie, A. (1998). Ergonomic guide-
late semantic relations between pictures that were physi- lines for the design of pictorial information. International Journal of
Industrial Ergonomics, 21, 407-413.
cally identical, physically different, semantically related,
Christ, R. E. (1977, October). Four years of color research for visual
or semantically unrelated. When the distractor icon was displays. In Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 21st Annual
semantically related, reaction times were found to be Meeting. San Francisco.
longer than when it was unrelated. This and subsequent Davies, S., Haines, H., Norris, B., & Wilson, J. R. (1998). Safety pic-
tograms: Are they getting the message across? Applied Ergonomics,
studies (Boucart & Humphreys, 1995, 1997) suggest that
21, 15-23.
the processing of an image form cannot be completed Easterby, R., & Zwaga, H. (1984).Information design: The design and
without some semantic analysis. This may also explain evaluation of signs and printed material. New York: Wiley.

--- PAGE 9 ---
342 FORSYTHE, SHEEHY, AND SAWEY
Fenk, A. (1998). Symbols and icons in diagrammatic representation. Mead, M., & Modley, R. (1968). Communications among all people,
Pragmatics & Cognition, 6, 301-334. everywhere. Natural History, 77, 56-63.
Garcia, M., Badre, A. N., & Stasko, J. T. (1994). Development and Muter, P., & Mayson, C. (1986). The role of graphics in item selection
validation of icons varying in their abstractness. Interacting With from menus. Behaviour & Information Technology, 5, 89-95.
Computers, 6, 191-211. Neisser, U., & Becklen, R. (1975). Selective looking:Attending to vi-
Giannini, A. J., Giannini, J. N., & Condon, M. (2000). Use of tangen- sually specified events. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 480-494.
tial visual symbols to increase the long-term learning processes: Ap- Nielsen, J. (1993). Noncommand user interfaces. Communications of
plications of linkage in teaching pharmacological principles of addic- the ACM, 36, 83-99.
tion. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 40, 708-712. Ostergaard, A. L., & Davidoff, J. B. (1985). Some effects of color on
Guastello, S. J., & Traut, M. (1989). Verbal versus pictorial repre- naming and recognition of objects. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
sentations of objects in a human–computer interface. International ogy: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 11, 579-587.
Journal of Man–Machine Studies, 31, 99-120. Parker, D. M., Lishman, J. R., & Hughes, J. (1997). Integration of spa-
Harber, R. N., & Hershenson, M. (1973). The psychology of visual tial information in human vision is temporally anisotropic: Evidence
perception. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. from a spatiotemporal discrimination task, Perception, 26, 1169-1180.
Harwerth, R. S., & Levi, D. M. (1978). Reaction time as a measure of Pellegrino,J. W., Rosinski, R. R., Chiesi, H. L., & Siegel,A. (1977).
suprathreshold grating detection. Vision Research, 18, 1579-1586. Picture–word differences in decision latency: An analysis of single
Hochberg, J. E. (1968). Perception (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: and dual memory models. Memory & Cognition, 5, 383-396.
Prentice-Hall. Piamonet, D. P. T., Abeysekera, J. D. A., & Ohlsson, K. (2001). Un-
Hochberg,J. E., & Brooks, V. (1960).The psychophysicsof form: Re- derstanding small graphical symbols: A cross-cultural study. Interna-
versible perspective drawings of spatial objects. American Journal of tional Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 27, 399-404.
Psychology, 73, 337-354. Raeder, G. (1985). A survey of current graphical programming tech-
Hoeger, R. (1997). Speed of processing and stimulus complexity in niques. IEEE Computer, 18, 11-25.
low-frequency and high-frequencychannels. Perception, 26, 1039-1045. Rogers, Y., & Oborne, D. J. (1987). Pictorial communication of ab-
Horton, W. (1994). The icon book. Visual symbols for computer systems stract verbs in relation to human computer interaction. British Jour-
and documentation. New York: Wiley. nal of Psychology, 78, 99-112.
Hummel, J. E., & Biederman, I. (1992). Dynamic binding in a neural Sanfeliu, M. C., & Fernandez, A. (1996). A set of 254 Snodgrass–
network for shape recognition. Psychological Review, 99, 480-517. Vanderwart pictures standardized for Spanish: Norms for name agree-
International Organization for Standardization (1995). Road ment, image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Behavior
Vehicles—Symbols for controls, indicators and tell-tales (ISO 2575). Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28, 537-555.
Geneva: Author. Schwartz, N. H., & Phillippe, A. E. (1991). Individual differences in
International Organization for Standardization (2000a). In- the retention of maps. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 16,
formation technology—User system interfaces and symbols—Icon 171-182.
symbols and functions: Part 1. Icons—General (ISO/IEC 11581-1). Snodgrass. J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of
Geneva: Author. 260 pictures. Norms for name agreement, image agreement, familiar-
International Organization for Standardization (2000b). In- ity and visual complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
formation technology—User system interfaces and symbols—Icon Human Learning & Memory, 6, 174-215.
symbols and functions: Part 2. Object icons (ISO/IEC 11581-2). Standing, L. (1973). Learning 10,000 pictures. Quarterly Journal of
Geneva: Author. Experimental Psychology, 25, 207-222.
International Organization for Standardization (2000c). In- Sutter, A., Beck, J., & Graham, N. (1989). Contrast and spatial vari-
formation technology—User system interfaces and symbols—Icon ables in texture segregation: Testing a simple spatial-frequency chan-
symbols and functions: Part 3. Pointer icons (ISO/IEC 11581-3). nels model. Perception & Psychophysics, 46, 312-332.
Geneva: Author. Treisman, A. (1986, November). Features and objects in visual pro-
International Organization for Standardization (2000d). In- cessing. Scientific American, 255, 114B-125.
formation technology—User system interfaces and symbols—Icon Treisman, A., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration theory of at-
symbols and functions: Part 6. Action icons (ISO/IEC 11581-6). tention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Geneva: Author. Treisman, A., & Souther, J. (1985). Search asymmetry: A diagnostic
Lindgaard, G., Chessari, J., & Ihsen, E. (1987). Icons in telecommu- preattentive processing of separable features. Journal of Experimen-
nications: What makes pictorial information comprehensible to the tal Psychology: General, 114, 285-310.
user? Australian Telecommunication Research, 21, 17-29. Tullis, T. S. (1981). An evaluation of alphanumeric, graphic, and color
Maguire, M. C. (1985). A review of human factors guidelines and tech- information displays. Human Factors, 23, 541-550.
niques for the design of graphical human–computer interfaces. Com- Vassilev, A., & Mitov, D. (1976). Perceptual time and spatial fre-
puter & Graphics, 9, 221-235. quency. Vision Research, 16, 89-92.
MathWorks(2001). Image Processing Toolbox,user’s guide Version 3. Walker, R. E., Nicolay, R. C., & Stearns, C. R. (1965). Comparative
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. accuracy of recognizing American and international road signs. Jour-
McDougall, S. J. P., Curry, M. B., & de Bruijn, O. (1999). Measur- nal of Applied Psychology, 49, 322-325.
ing symbol and icon characteristics: Norms for concreteness, com- Wandmacher, J., & Arend, U. (1985). Superiority of global features
plexity, meaningfulness, familiarity, and semantic distance for 239 in classification and matching. Psychological Research, 47, 143-157.
symbols. Behavior Research Methods,Instruments, & Computers, 31,
487-519.
McDougall, S. J. P., de Bruijn, O., & Curry, M. B. (2000). Explor-
ing the effects of icon characteristics on user performance: The role
of icon concreteness, complexity and distinctiveness. Journal of Ex- (Manuscript received October 9, 2001;
perimental Psychology: Applied, 6, 291-306. revision accepted for publication October 26, 2002.)
