--- PAGE 1 ---
Cronfa - Swansea University Open Access Repository
_____________________________________________________________
This is an author produced version of a paper published in :
EUROGRAPHICS 2013, State of the Art Reports
Cronfa URL for this paper:
http://cronfa.swan.ac.uk/Record/cronfa24643
_____________________________________________________________
Conference contribution :
Borgo, R., Kehrer, J., Chung, D., Laramee, B., Hauser, H., Ward, M. & Chen, M. (2013). Glyph-Based Visualization:
Foundations, Design Guidelines, Techniques, and Applications. EUROGRAPHICS 2013, State of the Art Reports,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2312/conf/EG2013/stars/039-063
_____________________________________________________________
This article is brought to you by Swansea University. Any person downloading material is agreeing to abide by the
terms of the repository licence. Authors are personally responsible for adhering to publisher restrictions or conditions.
When uploading content they are required to comply with their publisher agreement and the SHERPA RoMEO
database to judge whether or not it is copyright safe to add this version of the paper to this repository.
http://www.swansea.ac.uk/iss/researchsupport/cronfa-support/

--- PAGE 2 ---
EUROGRAPHICS 2013/ M. Sbert, L. Szirmay-Kalos STAR – State of The Art Report
Glyph-based Visualization: Foundations, Design Guidelines,
Techniques and Applications
R. Borgo1, J. Kehrer2, D. H. S. Chung1, E. Maguire3, R. S. Laramee1, H. Hauser4, M. Ward5 and M. Chen3
1 Swansea University, UK; 2 University of Bergen and Vienna University of Technology, Austria; 3 University of Oxford, UK;
4 University of Bergen, Norway; 5 Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA
Abstract
This state of the art report focuses on glyph-based visualization, a common form of visual design where a data set
is depicted by a collection of visual objects referred to as glyphs. Its major strength is that patterns of multivariate
data involving more than two attribute dimensions can often be more readily perceived in the context of a spatial
relationship, whereas many techniques for spatial data such as direct volume rendering find difficult to depict
with multivariate or multi-field data, and many techniques for non-spatial data such as parallel coordinates are
less able to convey spatial relationships encoded in the data. This report fills several major gaps in the literature,
drawing the link between the fundamental concepts in semiotics and the broad spectrum of glyph-based visualiza-
tion, reviewing existing design guidelines and implementation techniques, and surveying the use of glyph-based
visualization in many applications.
1. Introduction While glyphs are a form of illustrative graphics and visu-
alization, fundamentally they are dictionary-based encoding
Glyph-based visualization is a common form of visual de-
schemes. Historically, many of such schemes (e.g., maritime
sign where a data set is depicted by a collection of visual
semaphore and signal flags) have made indispensable contri-
objects referred to as glyphs. In a narrow interpretation,
butions around the world. Technically, dictionary-based en-
(a.1) a glyph is a small independent visual object that de- coding has shown great merits in text compression and im-
picts attributes of a data record; age compression. In the era of data deluge, one cannot help
(a.2) glyphs are discretely placed in a display space; and to contemplate the cost-effectiveness of using glyph-based
(a.3) glyphs are a type of visual sign but differ from other visualization in many applications, and the long-term poten-
types of signs such as icons, indices and symbols. tial of evolving glyph-based encoding schemes into a com-
In a broad interpretation, mon visualization language.
(b.1) a glyph is a small visual object that can be used inde-
pendently and constructively to depict attributes of a data
The design of glyphs can make use of many different
record or the composition of a set of data records;
visual channels such as shape, colour, texture, size, orien-
(b.2) each glyph can be placed independently from others,
tation, aspect ratio or curvature, enabling the depiction of
while in some cases, glyphs can be spatially connected to
multi-dimensional data attributes. Meanwhile, glyphs are
convey the topological relationships between data records
normally recognisable individually, offering a means of vi-
or geometric continuity of the underlying data space; and
sual fusion in multi-field visualization. Similar to most types
(b.3) glyphs are a type of visual sign that can make use of
of visual signs, a specific design of a glyph set is funda-
visual features of other types of signs such as icons, in-
mentally a visual coding scheme. Like all coding schemes,
dices and symbols.
a well-designed glyph-based visualization can facilitate ef-
In many applications, the spatial location of each glyph is ficient and effective information encoding and visual com-
pre-determined by the underlying spatial structure encoded munication. As a type of sign, a glyph is a stimulus pattern
in the data, such as a map in geo-information visualization, that has meanings, which can potentially attract greater at-
or a volumetric field in diffusion-tensor imaging. In other tention and stimulate more cognitive activity during visual-
applications, the spatial location represents the result of a vi- ization than other forms of visual design. In dealing with the
sual mapping from non-spatial information, such as the tem- ever-increasing problem of data deluge, it is a technique that
poral dimension and semantic grouping of data records. is not to be overlooked.
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 3 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
In the literature of visualization, there have been a few 2.1. A brief history of the study of signs
major surveys related to glyph-based visualization. The sur-
Signs in terms of indices, icons and symbols (Figure 1) are
vey by Ward [War08] provides a technical framework for
all different aspects of a similar unit of knowledge repre-
glyph-based visualization, covering aspects of visual map-
sentation, which has been used as a fundamental concept in
ping and layout methods, as well as addressing important
trade, commerce and industry from early days to present.
issues such as bias in mapping and interpretation. Ropinski
Symbolism has played an important part in the development
et al. [RP08, ROP11] present an in-depth survey on the use
of human culture, especially as a form of communication.
of glyph-based visualization for spatial multivariate medi-
The Paleolithic Age, around 18,000 BC, has given us hun-
cal data. Lie et al. [LKH09] describe a general pipeline for
dreds of examples in the form of cave paintings. The Ne-
the glyph-based visualization of scientific data in 3D along
olithic Age instead provides the first forms of pre-writing
with design guidelines such as the orthogonality of individ-
symbols used for communication: the Petroglyphs, images
ual attribute mappings. Because glyphs are commonly used
incised in rock petra (meaning “stone”) + glyphein (mean-
in vector field visualization, they have been discussed and
ing “to carve”) . Tribal societies continue to use this form of
compared with other forms of visualization in a collection
of surveys on flow visualization [PVH∗03, LHD∗04, PL09]. symbolic writing even in current times.
However, there is a need to build on these surveys by taking
An interesting aspect of petroglyphs is their similar-
a holistic overview of glyph-based visualization in terms of
ity across different continents; the commonality of styles
the fundamental concepts and theories, design guidelines, al-
strengthens the hypotheses that human conceptual system
gorithms and techniques and applications. In particular, this
is symbolic in nature as investigated by Jungian psychol-
survey is intended to address some noticeable gaps in the
ogy and early works from Mircea Eliade [EM91]. Psycho-
literature by:
physical studies have demonstrated how recurrent geomet-
• systematically examining the extensively rich collection ric patterns (form constants) in petroglyphs and cave paint-
of theories in semiotics, perception and cognition; and ings are “hard-wired” into the human brain. Petroglyphs are
identifying their relevance to glyph-based visualization; ancestors to pictograms (or pictograph) symbolic represen-
• categorizing the technical methods for glyph-based visu- tations restricted not just to objects but also places, activi-
alization in the scopes of both narrow and broad interpre- ties and structured concepts. Ideograms (or ideograph) are
tations, opening up the design space for future technical graphical symbols analogous to pictograms but believed to
advances; and have appeared later and with the main intent of representing
• surveying a large collection of applications where glyph- “ideas”; contemporary examples of ideograms can be found
based visualization has already made an impact. in wayfinding signage as well as technical notations such as
arabic numerals, mathematical notations or binary systems,
The survey is organized as follows: Section 2 examines
which maintain the same meaning despite the difference in
the studies of signs in philosophy, language studies and psy-
language and environment. Pictograms and ideograms are at
chology. We draw fundamental understanding from these
the base of early written symbols such as cuneiforms and hi-
studies in order to establish formal definitions of glyphs and
eroglyphs to sophisticated logographic writing system such
ways for classifying them. Section 3 surveys formal design
as the ones developed in Chinese and Eastern cultures. A
guidelines, mapping techniques and layout algorithms and
logogram (or logograph) is defined as a “grapheme” the fun-
rendering methods that have been used in practice. Section 4,
damental unit of a written language (as opposed to phoneme
examines a number of application areas where glyph-based
the fundamental unit of a spoken language). It can represent
visualization has been deployed. In particular, it describes
either a single letter or a morpheme, the smallest meaningful
the benefits brought by glyph-based visualization. Section 5
unit in the grammar of a language (e.g. a whole word or con-
summarizes the findings that have emerged during the com-
cept). The Cuneiform writing system for example, employed
pilation of this survey and proposes new interesting research
signs to represent numbers, things, words, and their pho-
avenues.
netics. Egyptian hieroglyphs contained a combination of lo-
gographic, alphabetic, and ideographic elements, consisting
2. History and Related Concepts mainly of three kinds of glyphs: phonetic glyphs, including
single-consonant characters that functioned like an alpha-
The term glyph is originated from Greek word, glyphe¯,
bet; logographs, representing morphemes, and ideograms,
meaning carving. Since the 16th century, its uses in En-
which narrowed down the meaning of a logographic or pho-
glish have been much associated with etymology, archae-
netic word. Chinese characters instead are derived directly
ology, topography and graphonomics. Although its contem-
from individual pictograms or combinations of pictograms
porary use in the context of multivariate visualization may
and phonetic signs and represents logograms used in writing
seem rather different, they share many interesting attributes,
Chinese, Japanese and Korean.
such as being “small”, being “visual”, having “meaning”, re-
quiring “learning”, and often being “metaphoric”. It is thus Examples of pictograms can be easily found today. Inter-
interesting to study briefly the related history and concepts. esting examples are the Pub and Inn signs found in Eng-
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 4 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Figure 1: In philosophy, language studies and psychology, signs may take one of the three forms, icon, index and symbol. In
many contexts, terms such as visual metaphor, ideogram and pictogram are also used to denote subclasses of signs.
land, Europe and North America. After an edict from King 2.2. Functional Space
Richard II in 1393 that required all alehouses to post a
According to Peirce [Pei02]’s theory of signs all modes of
sign they soon became a method of identifying and pro-
thinking depend on signs. Signs act as mediators between
moting themselves to the official ale tasters and the pub-
the external world of objects and the internal world of ideas.
lic. These signs still remain a tradition often exposing cre-
A sign in itself is a stimulus pattern associated with a mean-
ative and unusual but always metaphoric. The use of sym-
ing. Depending on how the meaning is associated with the
bols and signs has traversed human history for generations,
pattern (or object) a sign can be classified as either an icon,
due to their cross-cultural expressive power. Signs and sym-
an index or a symbol. The icon, index and symbol triad rep-
bols are fundamental means for communication transcend-
resents the different relationship between the sign and its ob-
ing cultural boundaries. With the advent of the computer
ject. Icons (such as pictures, images, models, or diagrams)
era, icons have become one of the most popular means of
represent a sign that itself resembles the qualities of the ob-
conveying messages. In the early 1980s the CHI commu-
ject it stands for (physical correlation). Indexes are defined
nity [BSG89, Bly82, Gay89] investigated the use of sounds
by some sensory feature (such as a clock, thermometer, fuel
in associations with visual display to create a new type of
gauge, or medical symptom) and therefore represent a sign
multisensory signs: the “earcons”. Today the use of icons,
which demonstrates the influence of its object (space and
with added sophisticated features such as animations and
time correlation). Symbols (such as a trophy, medal, receipt,
sounds, is now pervasive throughout most media platforms.
diploma, monument, word, phrase, or sentence) represent
As highlighted by Marcus [Mar03] specialised communities
a sign which is interpreted as a reference to its object. For
such as health and medicine, finance and banking, travel and
this reason, symbols are the only type of sign which do not
transportation, and education and training, already possess
require any physical, space or time correlation between the
widespread and sophisticated proprietary visual sign sys-
sign and its meaning (metaphysical correlation).
tems. The power of expression inherent to visual sign sys-
tems is appealing to media, technology and information vi- Codes provide the framework within which signs assume
sualization alike. The challenge relies on the development of a meaning. A symbol, for example, is a sign where the func-
well-designed sign systems. tion is a conventional rule (or coding) and is dependent only
on a process of interpretation (Figure 2).
2.2.1. Icons
The functional domain of icons is comprised of: images,
metaphors and diagrams. These three items all share topo-
logical similarity with the object they are related. Images
share sensory qualities, diagrams share relational and struc-
tural qualities, while metaphors elicit the representative
character of an object by building a parallelism with some-
thing else [JL02]. The typology of signs can be described
based on the different ways a sign refers to its object [PB55].
Indices require the existence of the object they are a sign of,
symbols require an interpreter; while icons require neither
object nor interpreter. A Euclidean diagram for example, is
Figure 2: The Pioneer 10 Spacecraft 1972 Plaque. made up of streaks of pencil lead that represent a geometric
line even though the latter “has no existence” [Pei02].
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 5 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
2.2.2. Indices act as vehicles to represent reality (representational codes).
Examples are:
The functional domain of indices is comprised of: tracks,
symptoms and designations [JL02]. The three types of index • scientific codes: including mathematics;
represent abstractions that rely on a physical cause/effect re- • aesthetic codes: within the various expressive arts (poetry,
lation which is not necessarily simultaneous with the object drama, painting, sculpture, music) and currents (classi-
to which they relate to. Despite simultaneously not being a cism, romanticism, realism);
constraint, an index cannot be a sign without its object (e.g • genre, rhetorical and stylistic codes: narrative (plot, char-
smoke is a symbol/sign of fire). acter, action, dialogue, setting), exposition, argument and
so on;
2.2.3. Symbols
• mass media codes: photography, television, film, radio,
The functional domain of symbols is comprised of all ab- newspaper and magazine codes, both technical and con-
stractions which rely on a code conventionally used in or- ventional (including format).
der to determine meaning. Examples of symbols are lan-
guages, mathematical symbols and alphanumeric characters 2.2.4.3. Interpretative Codes. Interpretative codes are
on a computer keyboard. Symbols as signs need an inter- perhaps the more interesting as they include:
preter but do not require any space or time correlation with
the object they are a sign of, therefore a symbol represents • ideological codes: individualism, capitalism, liberalism,
the only type of sign which: a) can be easily removed from conservatism, feminism, materialism, consumerism and
its context; and b) is closely associated with large sets of populism;
other words. • perceptual codes: visual perception.
Perception forms an integral part of the interpretation pro-
2.2.4. Codes
cess. As a semiotic code, perception involves the ability to
The Pioneer 10 plaque (Figure 2) represents an attempt at decode a message presented in a representational form (e.g.
communication with alien beings via a “pictorial message” a sign) and as such involves a learning process based on the
including all three type of signs previously described (e.g. influence of culture and context. In Section 3 we discuss de-
icons, indices and symbols) and it is an exemplar testimony sign guidelines that can be taken into consideration to aid the
of the importance of what semioticians call codes. Coding creation of glyphs with attributes making best use of human
is one of the fundamental concepts in semiotics and repre- perception.
sents a deterministic functional relation between two sets of
A code is a system of syntactic, semantic and behavioural
entities, namely: a signifier and a signified. Reading an im-
elements which must respond to three basic principles: co-
age, like the reception of any other message, is dependent
herence, homogeneity, and systematicity. In a communica-
on prior knowledge of possibilities (signifier); we can only
tional framework a code is significant if given a message,
recognise what we know (signified). It is this information
heterogeneous in nature, it assumes its specificity when
alone that enables us to separate the code from the message.
transmitted through the code. In the context of visual rep-
Related to sign, it is possible to distinguish between three
resentation the importance of proper coding is therefore
main kind of codes [Cha02]: social codes, textual codes and
self-explicative. Eco [Eco79] distinguishes between “signi-
interpretative codes.
fication” and “communication”. Signification is seen as the
2.2.4.1. Social Codes. All semiotic codes can be broadly semiotic event whereby a sign “stands for” something; com-
classified as social codes, however within our classification munication instead is seen as the transmission of information
we refer to social code in their narrow sense concerning im- from a source to a destination. In this context codes estab-
plicit or explicit social agreements and behaviours as in: lish rules for systems of signification and communication is
made possible by the existence of a code, or by a system
• verbal language: phonological, syntactical, lexical,
of signification. Without a code or a system of signification,
prosodic and paralinguistic subcodes;
there is no set of rules to determine how the expression of
• bodily codes: bodily contact, proximity, physical orienta-
signs is to be correlated with their content.
tion, appearance, facial expression, gaze, head nods, ges-
tures and posture;
• commodity codes: fashion, clothing and cars; 2.3. Theoretic Frameworks
• behavioural codes: protocols, rituals, role-playing and
games. Whilst semiotics is often encountered in the form of tex-
tual analysis, it also involves studying representations and
2.2.4.2. Textual Codes. Next to social codes and inter- the “reality” always involves representation. Semiosis was
pretative codes, textual codes represent one of the ma- first proposed as a term by Charles Sanders Peirce and sub-
jour groups of codes. According to Chandler’s classifica- sequently expanded by Eco [Eco79] to designate the process
tion [Cha02], textual codes relate to our knowledge and often by which a culture produces signs and/or attributes specific
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 6 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Figure 3: The Dyadic Model of the Sign Notion of Ferdinand
de Saussure [SBSR83].
Figure 5: Visual Variables [Mac04].
capture the systematic structure of a sign. In Semiotic Alge-
bra a sign is always divisible into subparts called sorts (e.g.,
colour, location, size). Sorts may have a hierarchical struc-
ture with relationship such as inheritance or partial ordering
Figure 4: The Structure of the Sign Notion (Triadic Model)
between subsorts. Signs can be composed into more com-
of Charles Sander Peirce [PB55].
plex signs through constructor rules, functions that build new
signs from other signs of given sorts plus additional param-
eters. Constructors express the whole/part relationship at the
meanings to signs. In modern semiotics there are two prin- base of complex signs. Some sign constructors can be more
cipal models of signs, the dyadic model due to Ferdinand important than others which gives rise to a priority partial
de Saussure [SBSR83], and the triadic model due to Charles ordering on the constructors of a given sort, for example: the
Peirce [PB55]. pollutants in a lake may be prioritised by their toxicity, to aid
in the design of an appropriate visualization. The complexity
2.3.1. Semiotic Models: Diadic and Triadic of a sign is measured in term of a hierarchy of levels, with
atomic signs at the lowest levels and complex sign built from
In the Dyadic Model (Figure 3) introduced by Ferdinand de
signs at lower or same levels.
Saussure [SBSR83] a sign is composed of the signifier (the
sound pattern of a word, either in mental projection - as when
2.3.3. Semiotic Systems: Grammar
we silently recite lines from a poem to ourselves - or in ac-
tual, physical realization as part of a speech act), and the Bertin [Ber83] proposed the first and probably unique at-
signified (the concept or meaning of the word). tempt at developing a syntax of visual signs based on formal
rules. Bertin identified six visual primitives, or fundamental
With its Triadic Model (Figure 4), Peirce [PB55] viewed
visual variables, which are at the basis of the construction
the symbol/index/icon triad as “the most fundamental di-
of any graphics sign: size, colour hue, colour value, grain,
vision of signs”, and the majority of semioticians continue
orientation, and shape. Bertin rated each visual variable in
to agree [Joh88]. Peirce thus defines “semiosis” as the pro-
function of the signified dataset, giving a rating of appro-
cess by which representations of objects function as signs.
priate or inappropriate to each visual variable for numeri-
Semiosis is a process of cooperation between signs, their ob-
cal, ordinal, and categorical data. This laid down the gram-
jects, and their “interpretants” (i.e. their mental representa-
matical rules of a syntax to guide the choice of appropri-
tions). “Semiotic” (i.e. the science of signs) is the study of
ate forms of graphical representation. MacEachren [Mac04]
semiosis and is an inquiry into the conditions which are nec-
proposed adding three extra variables based on advances in
essary in order for representations of objects to function as
graphics technology (Figure 5): clarity (fuzziness) of sign
signs.
vehicle components, resolution (of boundaries and images),
and transparency. He also provides a three-step rating for the
2.3.2. Semiotic Systems: Algebra
full set of visual variables of good, marginal, and poor for
According to Saussure [SBSR83] signs are always part of use with numerical, ordinal, and categorical data. Mackin-
a formal system with a specific structure and relations. In lay [Mac86] demonstrated the usefulness of such syntax of
its Semiotic Algebra Goguen [Gog03] devises a system to visual variables with his early implementation of an expert
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 7 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
system for automating the design of graphical representa-
tions.
3. Design Criteria and Guidelines
Glyphs represent different data variables by a set of visual (a) Proximity (b) Similarity
channels including shape, size, colour, orientation, etc. It
was a wide-spread opinion in the related research commu-
nity for a long time that “just” knowing these basic principles
of glyph-based visualization would suffice to its successful
usage. More recently, however, it has been understood that
only well designed glyphs are actually useful. Visual chan-
(c) Continuity (d) Closure
nels such as colour [Chr75] or size [LMvW10] are more
dominant and can help to focus the user’s attention. Other
channels such as position, length, angle or slope can be
measured and compared more accurately [CM84a, HBE96].
An effective glyph visualization should, therefore, carefully
choose and combine different visual channels. In this sec-
tion, we discuss critical design aspects and guidelines for
glyph-based visualization. (e) Symmetry
3.1. Design Space
As stated by Pettersson [Pet10] the main goal in information
design is clarity of communication; in order to fulfill this
goal, all messages must be accurately designed, produced
(f) Background/Foreground (g) Prägnanz
and distributed, and later correctly interpreted and under-
stood by members of the intended audience. Several prin- Figure 6: Gestalt Principles of Perceptual Organisation.
ciples to assist this design process have been proposed in
the literature some empirical in nature others more formally
perceived as symmetrical shapes that form around their cen-
defined.
ter. In Figure 6e (i) the perceived picture is usually three sets
of opening and closing brackets while in Figure 6e (ii) the
3.1.1. Perceptual Codes
dominant picture would be two overlapping diamonds. In
Gestalt psychologists outlined several fundamental and uni- the first case symmetrical balance is stronger than proxim-
versal principles (or laws) of perceptual organisation which ity while in the second case symmetrical regions tend to be
are assumed as a basis of a perceptual code (Figure 6): prox- seen as the dominant figures.
imity, similarity, continuity, closure, figure/ground, area,
The figure/ground principle (Figure 6f) states that ele-
symmetry and prägnanz.
ments are perceived as either figure (element of focus) or
The proximity principle (Figure 6a) states that objects that ground (background or surrounding area). In this principle
are closer to one another are perceived to be more related several factors play an important role: surroundedness, size
than those that are spaced farther apart. The proximity rela- (or area), symmetry, parallelism, and extremal edges. Each
tion has been proved to be stronger than colour similarity. of these five properties can determine which parts of a figure
are classified as figure or as background.
The similarity principle (Figure 6b) states that objects that
are similar are perceived to be more related than those that The prägnanz principle (Figure 6g) states that confronted
are dissimilar. with an ambiguous or complex representation the simplest
and most stable interpretation is always favoured.
The continuity principle (Figure 6c) states that elements
that are arranged on a line or curve are perceived to be more
3.1.2. Visual Channels
related than elements not on the line or curve. Continuation
is stronger than similarity of colour. A visual channel is a collection of primitive visual repre-
sentations that are used to convey different values of a vari-
The closure principle (Figure 6d) states that elements in
able. Other terms were introduced in the literature. For ex-
a complex arrangement tend to be grouped into a single,
ample, Bertin called them retinal variables, Ware referred
recognisable pattern.
to them as visual encoding variables as well as visual chan-
The symmetry principle (Figure 6e) states that objects are nels. Cleveland and McGill proposed a ranking of several
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 8 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Geometric Channels Optical Channels Topological and Rela- Semantic Channels
tional Channels
• size / length / width / • intensity / brightness • spatial location • number
depth / area / volume • colour / hue / satura- • connection • text
• orientation / slope tion • node / internal node / • symbol / ideogram
• angle • opacity / trans- terminator • sign / icon / logo /
• shape parency • intersection / overlap glyph / pictogram
• curvature • texture (partly geo- • depth ordering / par- • isotype
• smoothness metric) tial occlusion
• line styles (partly ge- • closure / contain-
ometric) ment
• focus / blur / fading • distance / density
• shading and lighting
effects
• shadow
• depth (implicit / ex-
plicit cues)
• implicit motion / mo-
tion blur
• explicit motion / ani-
mation / flicker
Table 1: Visual Channels [CF12].
visual channels (i.e., position, length, angle, slope, area, proposed and empirically validated in the context of visual
volume, colour and density) [CM84b]. Mackinlay extended metaphors used in interface design. The criteria proposed are
this exercise to some 13 visual channels [Mac86]. In ad- referred to with the acronym of CARSE: contextual suit-
dition, perceptual studies have been carried out to eval- ability, applicability of structure, representability/imagery,
uate the effectiveness of some basic visual channels, re- salience imbalance, prominence and emotional tone.
sulting in a common consensus about pop-out effects of
Context suitability, or relevance, indicates the extent to
some of them : colour ≺ size ≺ shape ≺ orientation (e.g.,
which the metaphorical sign resembles the source domain
[Wil67, QH87, ROP11]). The symbol ≺ reads as precedes.
with respect to the context of use.
However, the strength of colour over the other three chan-
nels is generally much more noticeable. Applicability of structure indicates the extent to which the
proposed metaphorical sign is relevant to the new and unfa-
Recently Chen and Floridi organised over 30 visual chan-
miliar concept that is being explained. The criteria can be
nels into a simple taxonomy consisting of four categories,
regarded as the correspondence between the source and the
namely geometric, optical, topological and semantic chan-
target domain, in [TS82] is referred to as “Within-Domain
nels [CF12].
Distance” while Lakoff [Lak95] calls it the “Invariance Prin-
Combining these into a common table, we have a rich col- ciple”.
lection of visual channels (Table 1).
Representability/imagery indicates the ease with which
Most of these visual channels can be of potential use in the visual metaphor can be represented.
glyph design, though only a small number of channels have
Salience imbalance refers to Ortony’s [Ort93] statement
been used in the literature. This suggests that the design
that good metaphors are the ones in which the source (vehi-
space for glyphs is far from being fully explored.
cle) domain contains elements or traits, which are highly ex-
plicit/prominent; at the same time these traits are very subtle
3.1.3. Design Criteria in the target (topic) domain. The visual representation should
convey these salient source traits to the receiver.
According to Eco [Eco79], a general semiotic theory should
include not only a theory of how codes may establish rules Emotional tone indicates the importance of emotions trig-
for systems of signification but a theory of how signs may be gered by the metaphor as one indicator of the semantic effi-
produced and interpreted to clarify aspects of communica- cacy of the function that is presented metaphorically. In a re-
tions. In the work of Yousef [You01] five criteria have been cent study, Maguire et al. proposed a set of guidelines based
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 9 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
on the literature of psychology and Bertin’s categorisation of In addition, Maguire et al. also suggested the impor-
semantic relevance [MRSS∗12]. These guidelines are: tance of establishing a metaphoric association between
a visual channel and the concept or concepts to be en-
coded [MRSS∗12]. Metaphoric visual representations en-
• Guideline on Semantic Relevance. Bertin [Ber83] clas-
able domain-specific encoding using “natural mapping”
sified visual channels (which he referred to as retinal vari-
[Sii02, Nor02]. This natural mapping can make it easier for
ables) into two categories, planar (location) and retinal
users to infer meaning from the glyph with less effort re-
(size, colour, shape, orientation, texture and brightness).
quired to learn and remember them [MdBC00]. A recent
Bertin proposed four semantic criteria for determining
study showed that visual metaphors can aid memorization
the suitability of different channels in representing cer-
of the information depicted in a visualization [BARM∗12].
tain types of information. These semantic criteria are: as-
However, the same study also showed that visually realistic
sociative, selective, ordered and quantitative. Since then,
metaphors (those with a lot of detail) may have a negative
research has also improved Bertin’s analysis. For exam-
impact on performance in visual search. Moreover, realis-
ple, it was shown that practice and familiarity can support
tic visual metaphors require a higher pixel resolution, and
selectivity with almost any shape [TG88,WCG94,Gre98].
would lose their discriminating capacity in low resolution
• Guideline on Channel Composition. As a glyph is likely
visualizations.
to feature a number of visual channels, the constructive
composition may affect how individual channels are per- A glyph is composed by a set of visual channels, each of
ceived. A rich collection of literature on integral and sep- which encodes a variable of a multivariate data record. Nat-
arable dimensions shows that the combined dissimilarity urally the first criterion is that the visual channel should ide-
of closely integrated visual channels exhibits Euclidean ally be able to encode many valid values of that variable, or
(cid:113)
distance da 2 + d
b
2 [KT75, HI72], whereas that of sepa- collectively, different visual channels of the glyph could en-
code many data records with different combinations of data
rable visual channels exhibits city-block distance da + d
b
values. However, this is not the only criterion, and in many
[BSMWE78,She64]. The latter is more cost-effective than
cases, it may not even be the most important criterion. If
the former in rule-based encoding of multi-faceted con-
the goal is to encode as many values as possible, one may
cepts, therefore effective glyph design should encompass
be better off reading these values in text directly. Chung et
a non-conflicting set of separable retinal variables.
al. [CLP∗13] proposed eight criteria for glyph design in the
• Guideline on Pop-out Effects. Many classic studies in
context of sorting glyphs visually (Figure 7). These are:
perception also established the “power” of different visual
channels in terms of pop-out effect (pre-attentive search), a Typedness – This criterion refers to whether or not each
and fixation (during attentive search) [HE11]. The pop- visual channel in a glyph is appropriately selected to
out effect is one which allows identification of a target match with the data type of the variable to be encoded.
within a few nanoseconds of initial exposure to the vi- Such data types may include, but not limited to: nominal,
sual search space. A result of several milestone studies ordinal, interval, ratio, and directional.
focusing on observed response times it shows the order- b Visual Orderability – When a variable to be encoded is or-
ing of the four commonly used visual channels to fol- derable, the corresponding visual channel should ideally
low the consensus: colour ≺ size ≺ shape ≺ orientation be orderable visually (e.g., size, greyscale intensity, but
(e.g., [Wil67,QH87,ROP11]). The symbol ≺ reads as pre- not an arbitrary set of shapes).
cedes. However, the strength of colour over the other three c Channel Capacity – This refers to the number of values
channels is generally much more noticeable. that may be encoded by a visual channel. Such a number is
• Guideline on Visual Hierarchy. Visual hierarchy, with often affected by the size of a glyph and many perceptual
which the environment and objects around us are arranged factors (e.g., just-noticeable-difference, interference from
is a well documented theoretical framework [Pal77, nearby visual objects).
Nav77, LRW99, KW79, Bar04]. However, the literature d Separability – When two or more visual channels are in-
debates over the ways in which the visual system traverses tegrated into a compound channel, such as combining in-
this hierarchy. There are four possible ways: top-down tensity, hue and saturation into a colour channel, the in-
(also called global processing) [Nav77]; bottom-up (also terference between different primitive channels should be
called local processing); middle-out [KW79]; and salient minimised.
features (e.g., edges, points, colours) [Rum70]. Because e Searchability – This refers to the levels of ease when one
glyphs are relatively small in comparison with an entire needs to identify a specific visual channel within a glyph
visualization, top-down and salient feature detection play for a specific variable.
significant roles in selecting a glyph or glyphs of interest. f Learnability – This is often an important criterion in many
The top-down assumption suggests that when considering applications. Ideally, a glyph design should be easy to
a glyph in isolation, its global features will affect visual learn, and easy to remember. There are many factors that
search more than its local features. Salient features are may affect a visual design in this context, for instance,
partly addressed by pop-out effects. whether there are well-defined constructive rules, whether
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 10 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Figure 7: Glyph design criteria [CLP∗13].
there are memorable metaphors, whether it is easy to integral-separable dimension pairs, natural mappings and
guess, and so on. perceptual efficient encoding. Integral-separable dimension
g Attention Balance – Different visual channels in a glyph pairs focus on the readability of multi-attribute glyphs and
will receive different levels of attention. Ideally, the levels multi-glyphs displays, Karve and Gleicher [KG07] argue
of attention should correspond to the levels of importance that individual glyphs should combine as many separable vi-
of the variables. However, this is easier said than done as sual attributes as possible and multi-glyph displays should be
the relative importance of a variable is often undefined or dense, juxtaposing related items, and employing repetitive
may vary from tasks to tasks. design motifs that support inter-glyph comparison. Natural
h Focus and Context – This refers to the need to identify an mappings (e.g. use of metaphoric representations) focuses
individual visual channel under a certain interactive oper- on the natural relationship between data and glyph features;
ation. For example, when a user select a certain variable a clear relationship between visual and data attributes en-
as a sort key, it is desirable to highlight the corresponding hances glyph usability. Perceptual efficiency of the encoding
visual channel so it stands out from other channels. focuses on the encoding of a continuous variable; horizontal
bars on a shared positional scale are found to be the most ac-
This is not an exhaustive list, and there are other design
curate method followed in decreasing order of accuracy by
criteria, such as aesthetic appearance that also play an im-
interval length, slope, area, volume, and colour.
portant role.
3.1.4.1. Measurements and Norms If symbol design is
3.1.4. Design Processes to progress, we need to know more about why some sym-
bols are easier to use than others. A major obstacle facing
Petterson [Pet10] introduces four categories of principles
researchers attempting to answer this question has been the
supporting the visual representation design process:
difficulties in quantifying symbol characteristics so that they
• Functional Principles: focus, structure, clarity, simplicity, can be experimentally controlled. A good way of controlling
emphasis and unity; symbol characteristics experimentally is to obtain subjective
• Administrative Principles: accessibility, cost, ethics and ratings of each characteristic.
quality;
Although there has been a long tradition in psycholin-
• Aesthetic Principles: harmony and aesthetic proportion;
guistic research of using normative ratings to control item
• Cognitive Principles: facilitating attention, facilitating
characteristics for words and pictures, no normative rat-
perception, facilitating mental processing and facilitating
ings for symbols have yet been produced. McDougall et
memory.
al. [MCdB99, MdBC00] address the problem by providing
For each category Petterson provides detailed guidelines on normative ratings for five symbol characteristics considered
how to achieve the target result with the appropriate use of determinant in the development of easy to use and under-
text, picture, layout and colour. stand symbols: concreteness, visual complexity, meaningful-
ness, familiarity, semantic distance.
Given the abundance of multivariate data, perceptual and
cognitive efficiency is at the core of glyph-based visual- McDougall et al. highlights and investigates several inter-
ization. Karve and Gleicher [KG07] identify three consid- esting correlations between these five criteria. Concreteness,
erations for the design of complex and compound glyphs: for example, (as opposed to abstraction) is somehow in op-
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 11 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
position to visual complexity; concrete symbols tend to be
more visually obvious because they depict objects, places,
and people that are already familiar. In contrast, abstract
symbols represent information using graphic features such
as shapes, arrows and so on. One of the reasons why concrete
symbols are more visually obvious may simply be because
the extra detail provided in concrete symbols makes them
easier to comprehend. In contrast, however, design guide-
lines typically suggest that the design of symbols or icons visual channels
should be kept as simple as possible. Other researchers have (b) glyph mapping / instantiation
focused on the fact that concrete symbols are more meaning-
ful than abstract symbols.
Semantic, or articulatory, distance is a measure of the
closeness of the relationship between the symbol and what
it is intended to represent. A number of classification sys-
tems have been developed in order to attempt to characterise
the different relationships between symbols and their func-
tions [Pei02].
Familiarity reflects the frequency with which symbols are
encountered. This property is thought to be an important de-
terminant of usability. It is evident that user performance
improves dramatically as a result of learning symbols and
signs. The effects of some symbol characteristics on perfor-
mance, such as colour and concreteness, diminish as sym-
bols become more familiar but others, such as complexity,
do not.
In [MdBC00, NC08] the relationship between: concrete-
ness/visual complexity, concreteness/meaningfulness and
meaningfulness/familiarity/semantic distance were exam-
ined in detail using subjective rating methods. For each char-
acteristic subjects had to choose bipolar adjectives based on
a five-point scale to indicate their perception of an icon. Ng
et al. [NC08] propose a review of the relationships among
the same five characteristics together with a description of
three types of measures used in literature to quantify such
relationships:
• subjective rating (as in [MdBC00]);
• icon-based metric: the measure is obtained summing up
the components of an icon, such as letters, lines, arrows
and so on;
• automated visual measurement: the measure is a function
of icon features extracted via image analysis techniques
such as edge-detection, perimeter determination, decom-
position and so on.
Other symbol characteristics present in literature are dis-
criminability, distinctiveness and configurality, however to
provide a normative rating is a much harder task since such
characteristics can only be defined (and quantified) in re-
lation to the other symbols included in the display as a
whole [MdBC00].
selbairav
1 1
0 0
0 1
(a) data mapping
(c) rendering
’tuptuo
1
0
variable output’ 1 i
”tuptuo
output”
tuptuo
γ < 1
w left w right γ > 1
min max 0
(i) windowing (ii) exponentiation (iii) mapping
Figure 8: A pipeline for creating glyphs [LKH09]: (a) Each
data variable is subject to three stages of data mapping: win-
dowing, exponentiation and mapping. (b) The data variables
are mapped to the different visual channels of a glyph (e.g.,
upper/lower shape, size, and rotation) and used to instantiate
the individual glyphs. (c) Finally, the glyphs are rendered in
their spatial context.
3.2. General Design Considerations and Guidelines
3.3. Design and Usage Guidelines for Glyphs
A number of design guidelines (marked with DGx in the
following) for glyph-based visualization have been pro-
posed [War02, War08, RP08, LKH09, ROP11, MRSS∗12],
and we review them in the following. Ward [War02] sur-
veys glyph-based representations for information visualiza-
tion and presents a taxonomy for glyph placement. Ropin-
ski et al. [RP08, ROP11] propose a perception-based glyph
taxonomy for medical visualization. Glyph-based visualiza-
tions are categorised according to:
• pre-attentive visual stimuli such as glyph shape, colour
and placement, and
• attentive visual processing, which is mainly related to the
interactive exploration phase (e.g., changing the position
or parameter mapping of a glyph).
In the context of medical visualization, the authors propose
usage guidelines for glyphs, which are addressed later on.
Inspired by the work of Ropinski and Preim [RP08],
Lie et al. [LKH09] propose further guidelines for glyph-
based 3D data visualization. Aligned with the visualization
pipeline [HS09], the task of creating a glyph-based 3D visu-
alization is divided into three stages as shown in Figure 8:
• during data mapping, the data attributes of a record are
remapped (to achieve, for example, some contrast en-
hancement) and mapped to the different visual channels
of a glyph;
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 12 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Figure 9: Small simple glyphs vs. large and complex glyphs: (a) Stick figures form textural patterns [PG88]. (b) Dense
glyph packing for diffusion tensor data [KW06]. (c) Helix glyphs on maps for analyzing cyclic temporal patterns for two
diseases [TSWS05]. (d) The local flow probe can simultaneously depict a multitude of different variables [dLvW93].
• glyph mapping (or glyph instantiation) creates the indi- not placed in a dense way, the space between them can be
vidual glyphs, properly arranged across the domain; and used for additional information. Treinish [Tre99], for exam-
• during rendering, the glyphs are placed in the resulting ple, visualizes multivariate weather data using colour con-
image, where one has to cope with issues such as visual touring on vertical slices and isosurfaces that represent cloud
cluttering or occlusion. boundaries. At user-defined locations (vertical profiles), the
wind velocity and direction are represented by a set of arrow
For each of these steps, the following sections discuss criti-
glyphs. Streamlines following the wind direction are seeded
cal design aspects and guidelines for glyph-based visualiza-
at each arrow. Kirby et al. [KML99] use concepts from paint-
tion.
ing for visualizing 2D flow. They combine different image
Table 2 illustrates different papers which are consistent layers with glyphs, elongated ellipses, and colour.
with the design guidelines presented here. The papers are
also categorised according to the utilised visual channels, di-
mensionality of the visualization space, and density of glyph 3.4. Data Mapping
placement.
Each dimension or variable of a data set will map to a spe-
[DG1] Task-based choice of visualization space. Glyph- cific graphical attribute. By modifying the order of dimen-
based visualization approaches vary with respect to whether sions while preserving the type of mapping, as many as N!
they are constructed in a 2D or 3D visualization space. In alternate "views" of the data can be generated. An impor-
case of abstract data such as census or financial data, this tant issue in using glyphs is to ascertain which ordering(s)
decision is often dependent on the task at hand. However, will be most supportive of the task at hand. Several possibil-
certain scenarios with 3D volumetric or flow data inherently ities exist, beyond random ordering or the order in which the
require a 3D visualization. We think that it also makes sense variables were originally stored [War08]:
to consider glyph-based visualizations, which are based on
the placement of glyphs on 3D surfaces [RSMS∗07] (called • Correlation-driven. Many researchers have proposed us-
2.5D in the following). ing correlation and other similarity measures to order
dimensions for improved visualization [Ber83, ABK98,
[DG2] Task-based compromise between complexity
FK03,BS92]. These orderings help reveal clusters of sim-
and density. Glyph-based visualization approaches span a
ilar variables, outlier records, and gradual shifts in rela-
certain spectrum from dense arrangements of relatively sim-
tionships between variables.
ple shapes such as stick figures [PG88] (Figure 9a) to indi-
• Complexity and Symmetry-driven. Gestalt principles
vidual instances of complex glyphs that reveal a lot of infor-
indicate we have a preference for simple shapes, and
mation (but only for few, selected places, Figures 9c and d).
we are good at seeing and remembering symmetry.
Additionally, we can differentiate visualization solutions ac-
In [PWR04] the shapes of star glyphs resulting from us-
cording to which visual channels are varied according to the
ing different dimension orders were evaluated for two
data, and how many different values a glyph eventually rep-
attributes: monotonicity (the direction of change is con-
resents. Usually this number is not too large, often 2 to 4, but
stant) and symmetry (similar ray lengths on opposite sides
then also examples exist where dozens of values are repre-
of the glyph). The ordering that maximised the number of
sented (e.g., the local flow probe [dLvW93] in Figure 9d).
simple and symmetric shapes was chosen as the best. User
[DG3] Hybrid visualizations. Ropinski et al. [RP08] studies showed improved performance with complexity
suggest combining glyphs with other visualization tech- and symmetry optimised orderings.
niques such as isosurfaces or volume rendering, which pro- • Data-driven. Another option is to base the order of the
vide spatial context [RSMS∗07, CM93]. When glyphs are dimensions on the values of a single record (base), using
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 13 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Figure 10: The figure shows monetary exchange rates over 3 Figure 11: In this figure, the dimensions are sorted based on
years using random ordering. the first record. Gradual changes and anomalies are much
easier to perceive.
an ascending or descending sort of the values to specify
Another option would be a ranking-based mapping where
the global dimension order. This can allow users to see
the data is sorted first and each discrete value (or bin) is
similarities and differences between the base record and
then shown differently, for example, using different shapes
all other records. For example, sorting the exchange rates
such as a triangle, circle, or star [STH02]. After the window-
of 10 countries with the U.S. by their relative values in the
ing, the contrast of a data variable can be further enhanced
first year of the time series exposes a number of interest-
using an optional exponential mapping e(x) = xγ. Using a
ing trends, anomalies, and periods of relative stability and
value γ ∈]0, 1[, smaller values are represented more promi-
instability (Figures 10 and 11).
nently (see the dashed red curve in Figure 8a (ii)). In con-
• User-driven. As a final strategy, we can allow users to
trast, larger values are emphasised with γ > 1. Since an ex-
apply knowledge of the data set to order and group di-
ponential mapping can be hard to interpret, it should not be
mensions by many aspects, including derivative relations,
used as a default mapping. It can rather be applied when the
semantic similarity, and importance. Derivative relations
user is interactively exploring the visualization, for instance,
mean that the user is aware that one or more dimensions
by modifying the parameter mappings to focus of different
may simply be derived through combinations of other di-
portions of the data. Finally, a third mapping step enables the
mensions. Semantic similarity indicates dimensions that
user to restrict or transform the output range that should be
have related meanings within the domain.
depicted by a visual channel. Using a reverted mapping, for
Finally, some dimensions are likely to have more importance instance, smaller values, which are possibly more important
than others for a given task, and thus ordering or assign- to the user, are depicted in an enhanced style while larger
ing such dimensions to more visually prominent features of values are de-emphasised. Consequently, also semantics of
the glyph will likely have a positive impact on task perfor- the data variables can be considered, which is an important
mance. In order to optimally represent a data variable us- guideline when mapping a data variable to a visual channel
ing a visual channel of the glyph, the corresponding data of a glyph [War02, ROP11].
range should be normalised, for instance, to the unit inter-
val [ROP11, War02, LKH09]. The remapped data attributes
3.5. Glyph Mapping / Instantiation
parameterize the visual appearance of a glyph. Ropinski et
al. [RSMS∗07], for example, use an interface similar to a During glyph mapping the individual glyphs are created by
transfer function editor for mapping a data attribute to a vi- representing the data variables with different visual channels
sual channel of the glyph. of a glyph. During this step, the glyphs are also properly ar-
ranged across the domain. In the following, we discuss gen-
Lie et al. [LKH09] propose three consecutive steps for
eral design guidelines during this mapping stage as well as
the data mapping stage. First, the data values within a user-
guidelines related to glyph shape and appearance.
selected data range [w , w ] are mapped to the unit in-
left right
terval (Figure 8a (i)). Values outside this range are clamped [DG4] Perceptually uniform glyph properties. When
to 0 or 1, respectively. Consequently, the contrast of the visu- mapping a data variable to a glyph property, equal distances
alization can be enhanced with respect to a range of interest in data space should be perceived equally as well. This is an
(sometimes called windowing). A linear mapping would be important guideline for glyph design, and it was originally
a natural choice for this step, but also other forms of map- developed for colour maps [RTB96]. The box plot [MTL78],
ping could be considered, such as a discontinuous mapping. for example, uses position and height of the box / whiskers
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 14 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
Table 2: Categorisation of glyph-based approaches according to design guidelines, visualization space and visual channels. In
DG2, the approaches span a spectrum from individual instances of complex glyphs (-3) to dense arrangements of relatively
simple shapes (+3).
to encode minimum and maximum value, median, and other mapping a data variable to multiple glyph channels. Such
quartile information of a data distribution. A negative exam- a mapping can reduce the risk of information loss by en-
ple in this context would be mapping a data variable to the coding important variables multiple times, which is also
radius of a circle. The circle’s area then increases quadrat- an important guideline for glyph design [LKH09,ROP11].
ically with respect to the radius (instead of linearly). Li et • a many-to-one mapping represents multiple data variables
al. [LMvW10] study the perception of symbol size, which by the same kind of visual channel, for example, the
is assumed to be the second dominant visual channel (after height of bars in a histogram or profile glyph. Such a map-
colour [Chr75]). Their experiments suggest that the percep- ping is useful when comparing the different data variables
tion of size can be best represented by a power law transfor- for a data element [War08].
mation. Another negative example would be the usage of a
rainbow colour map, which is not perceptually uniform and [DG6] Importance-based mapping. According to
does not have a perceptual ordering [BT07]. Ropinski et al. [ROP11], important variables should be en-
hanced in the visualization, for instance, by using a redun-
[DG5] Redundant mapping of variables. According to
dant mapping (compare to the previous guideline). More-
Ward [War08], there are three different mappings:
over, the mapping should guide the user’s focus of attention,
• a one-to-one mapping assigns each data variable to a dif- e.g., using more prominent visual stimuli such as colour, size
ferent visual channel of the glyph; or opacity to encode relevance. Ropinski et al. [RSMS∗07],
• a one-to-many mapping makes use of redundancies by for example, use surface glyphs to show data from positron
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 15 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
emission tomography (PET). An inverse mapping is used, In the following, additional guidelines for shape design
which maps low PET activity to thick and high PET ac- are discussed in relation to other visual properties.
tivity to thin glyphs. Consequently, interesting regions with
reduced activity are shown in an enhanced style. Maguire 3.5.2. Other Visual Properties / Glyph Appearance
et al propose an algorithmic approach to importance-based Pre-attentive visual stimuli such as position, width, size, ori-
mappings [MRSS∗12]. Their algorithm builds a taxonomy entation, curvature, colour (hue), or intensity are a powerful
(a hierarchical classification) from a list of qualitative terms way to represent data [CM84a, HBE96]. These visual chan-
grouped into classification schemes. The higher up some nels are rapidly processed by our low-level visual system
classification scheme is in the taxonomy (determined algo- and can thus be used for the effective visualization of large
rithmically and based on term use for instance), the stronger data. Special care is required, however, if several such stim-
the visual channel to represent that scheme will be. uli are combined—the result may not be pre-attentive any
more. Healey and Enns [HE99] propose simple texture pat-
terns and colour to visualize multivariate data. Different data
3.5.1. Shape Design variables are encoded in the individual elements of a percep-
tual texture using equally distinguishable colours and texture
One of the most prominent visual channels of a glyph is
dimensions such as element density, regularity and height.
its shape. Ropinski et al. [ROP11] distinguish between ba-
Groups of neighboring elements form texture patterns that
sic glyph shapes such as variants of superquadrics [Bar81]
can be analysed visually.
(sphere, torus) and composite shapes that combine multi-
ple basic shapes. Since basic shapes can be perceived pre- Ward [War08] identifies different biases that are intro-
attentively the authors argue that they should be used to con- duced when mapping a data variable to a glyph property. The
vey the most important information. Composite glyphs, on first kind of biases are related to human perception. Different
the other hand, are interpreted in the exploration phase and properties of a glyph can be perceived and related with vary-
are usually not pre-attentive, i.e., they are analysed sequen- ing accuracy. Cleveland and McGill [CM84a] identify differ-
tially. Chernoff faces [Che73], for instance, represent data ent visual channels and perform perceptual experiments. The
variables by different features of a cartoon face (e.g., shape visual channels are ordered based on how accurately they
of the face; size and position of eyes, nose, and mouth; cur- can be perceived: 1) position along a common scale; 2) po-
vature of the mouth). The Glyphmaker [RAEM94] provides sition along non-aligned scale; 3) length, angle or slope;
a user interface that enables non-programmers to map data 4) area; 5) volume or curvature; 6) shading or colour satu-
variables to the different properties of a glyph such as posi- ration. Moreover, adjacent properties of a glyph are easier to
tion, colour, shape, overall size and transparency. Kraus and relate and compare than nonadjacent (Ward calls these prox-
Ertl [KE01] propose a similar tool for scientific data. imity-based biases [War08]). Finally, data variables mapped
to semantically or perceptually grouped glyph properties
[DG7] View point independence: Glyph shapes should (e.g., the ears or eyes in Chernoff faces [Che73]) are easier
be unambiguously perceivable independent of the viewing to distinguish than variables mapped to non-related features.
directions [ROP11]. When using 3D glyph shapes, one has
[DG9] Orthogonality and Normalization: When de-
to account for possible distortions introduced when viewing
signing glyphs, it is especially important to consider how dif-
the glyph from a different point of view. Lie et al. [LKH09],
ferent glyph properties interact with each other and thereby
therefore, suggest to use 2D billboard glyphs in order to
possibly distort the interpretation (compared to channel
avoid this problem. In certain scenarios, however, it makes
composition [MRSS∗12]). A challenge in this context is the
sense to use 3D glyphs, for example, when they have a se-
orthogonality [LKH09] of the different glyph components,
mantic meaning. Such an example would be arrow glyphs
meaning that it should be possible to perceive each visual
that depict a flow field [CM93]. Kindlmann [Kin04] use
cue independently (or to mentally reconstruct the depicted
superquadric glyph shapes that fulfill DG7. For composite
data variables as suggested by Ropinski et al. [ROP11]).
shapes, Ropinski et al. [ROP11] distinguish between direc-
Moreover, one has to account for distortions introduced by
tional and non-directional glyphs.
the different glyph properties. When using, for example,
[DG8] Simplicity and Symmetry: According to Gestalt glyph shape to represent a data variable this affects the area
laws [War04], simple and symmetric shapes facilitate the (size) of the glyph as well. Accordingly, such effects should
perception of visual patterns. Also, simple glyph shapes en- be normalised against each other [LKH09]. In the previous
hance the detection of minor shape changes as well as out- example, the overall glyph size could thus be altered in or-
liers [War08]. Peng et al. [PWR04], for instance, automat- der to compensate for the changes introduced by variations
ically reorder the data-to-property mapping for generating in shape. However, it is not always easy to design a glyph-
more symmetric and simple star glyphs. Lie et al. [LKH09] based visualization such that the different data-to-property
propose horizontally symmetric glyphs that are based on su- mappings are independent and do not influence each other
perellipses, which should facilitate the mental reconstruct of (e.g., the interpretation of shape details is usually influenced
glyph parts that are occluded. by the size of the glyph).
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 16 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
[DG10] Intuitive mapping based on semantics. Se- to represent DTI data. Kindlmann and Westin [KW06] use
mantics of the data should be incorporated in the glyph a particle system for densely packing superquadric glyphs
mapping [War08, LKH09, ROP11, MRSS∗12]. Crawfis and (Figure 9b). Meyer-Spradow et al. [MSSD∗08] evenly dis-
Max [CM93], for instance, combine small coloured vector tribute surface glyphs by combining a random placement
glyphs depicting wind velocity with contour surfaces rep- with relaxation criteria.
resenting cloudiness. Another example would be to repre-
In the context of glyph placement, the number of depicted
sent temperature with a diverging colour map [Bre99], where
data variables must be seen in relation to the available screen
white is used to indicated 0◦C, blue indicates minus and red
resolution (compare to DG2). Large and complex glyphs
plus degrees.
such as the local probe [dLvW93] can be used when only
a few data points need to be visualised (or during individ-
3.5.3. Glyph Placement ual exploration). If many glyphs should be displayed in a
dense manner, however, a more simple glyph may be desir-
The placement of glyphs is a prominent visual stimuli and
able [PG88, KW06, LKH09].
can be used to convey information about the data. In the con-
text of information visualization, Ward [War02] categorizes
placement strategies into data- and structure-driven place- 3.6. Rendering
ment. The former is directly based on individual variables
In the final stage of the visualization pipeline (Figure 8),
or spatial dimensions of the data, or on derived informa-
glyphs are transferred from visualization space to the result-
tion such as principal components. Examples of data-driven
ing image, where one has to cope with issues such as visual
strategies are placing the glyphs in a 2D scatterplot or locat-
cluttering, depth perception, and occlusion [LKH09]. In the
ing them aligned with the underlying data grid (in case of
following, we discuss approaches such as halos, interactive
spatial data). Structure-driven placement, on the other hand,
slicing, or brushing.
is based on the ordering, hierarchical or other relationships
of the data variables. According to Ropinski et al. [ROP11] [DG12] Facilitate depth perception for 3D visualiza-
such strategies, however, are not directly applicable to med- tions. In cases where many glyphs overlap, halos can help
ical data. Therefore, they suggest feature-driven placement to enhance the depth perception and to distinguish individ-
as an additional category, where glyphs are placed on local ual glyphs from each other [LKH09]. Piringer et al. [PKH04]
data features such as iso-surfaces [RSMS∗07, MSSD∗08]. and Interrante et al. [IG98] use halos to emphasize dis-
We consider it useful to also consider user-driven placement, continuity in depth and to draw the users attention to-
where glyphs are manually placed to investigate the data at wards objects. For improving the depth perception for non-
a certain location [dLvW93, Tre99]. overlapping glyphs, a special colour map (called chroma
depth [Tou97]) can be used to represent depth. Since colour
In the context of data-driven placement [War02], glyphs
is a dominant visual channel, however, it is questionable
can be placed according to derived information as well. Di-
whether to use it for depicting depth instead of depicting a
mensionality reduction approaches, for instance, aim at re-
data variable.
ducing the data dimensionality while maintaining the higher-
dimensional characteristics. Such placement strategies can [DG13] Avoid occlusion by interactive slicing or
facilitate the perception of similar glyph shapes, which brushing: Occlusion is a major problem when reading
should be located close to each other. Principal component glyphs. Therefore, it can be advantageous to employ interac-
analysis [WG11] (PCA) is such an example, which trans- tive slicing or brushing. Using a view dependent slice-based
forms multivariate data into an orthogonal coordinate sys- visualization, for example, glyphs that are located in front
tem that is aligned with the greatest variance in the data. of a user-controlled plane are not displayed [LKH09]. Using
Wong and Bergeron [WB97] apply multi-dimensional scal- linking and brushing in coordinated multiple views, glyphs
ing (MDS) for mapping higher-dimensional data items into a can be filtered out based on user-defined criteria [KMDH11].
lower-dimensional space while preserving the dissimilarities
[DG14] Avoid perspective projections when using
between the items. Since MDS also maintains the higher-
glyph size to encode a data variable [ROP11]. In such
dimensional structure of the data, it is well suitable for sub-
cases, an orthographic projection is preferable, which sup-
sequent clustering. With such methods, however, the seman-
ports the comparison of glyph size at different locations.
tic meaning of the glyph location is usually lost, in contrast
to techniques that are based on the raw data [War02].
3.7. Glyph Interaction
[DG11] Balanced glyph placement. Glyphs may over-
lap and form unwanted aggregations in image space, for in- Interaction in glyph-based visualizations forms an important
stance, resulting from a regular data grid. Such aggregations aspect in modern visual analytics. Legg et al. [LCP∗12] in-
should be avoided, since they may be erroneously identified troduce such an example in sport notational analysis, by de-
as features [ROP11, War02]. Laidlaw et al. [LAK∗98], for veloping the MatchPad: an interactive visualization software
instance, apply random jittering when placing brush strokes that incorporates a series of intuitive user-interactions and a
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 17 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
scale-adaptive layout to support data navigation. One essen- include a colour legend which users can use to formulate
tial requirement in notational analysis in sport is the ability more quantitative glyphs and repositioning glyphs where the
to review key video event footage. Since glyphs have a lim- glyph properties adapt depending on the location. Based on
ited encoding capacity, it would be impractical to map such this classification, the authors describe eight usage guide-
data (e.g., a video clip, tracking data) entirely to a glyph. lines which they evaluate against modern diffusion tensor
Thus, the authors interactively link the playback of videos imaging and cardiac visualization.
through glyphs to support rapid information retrieval.
Westin et al. [WMM∗02] introduce a novel analytical so-
The work of Chung et al. [CLP∗13] extends this further lution to the Stejskal-Tanner diffusion equation system from
by integrating focus+context techniques into glyph-based vi- which a set of derived diffusion tensor metrics describes the
sual analytics to emphasise the perceptual orderability of at- geometric properties of a diffusion ellipsoid. Using three
tributes on glyphs. They propose a system that incorporates tensor eigenvalues, the quantitative shape measures, c
l
, cp,
a focus+context glyph-based interface to control and under- and cs indicate the linear, planar and spherical properties of
stand high-dimensional sorting of multivariate data. Selected a tensor. In addition, the authors present a visualization tech-
components on the glyph are rendered in focus which adjusts nique using a composite tensor glyph built from a sphere,
and populates various sorting parameters within a linked disc and rod that are mapped to the three eigenvalues which
Interactive, Multidimensional Glyph (IMG) plot. The IMG aims to reduce the ambiguity caused by traditional ellipsoid
plot arranges the glyphs along two primary sorting axes. representation. The composite glyphs are colour-coded ac-
Various interactive tools are described to support user ex- cording to shape such that blue is mapped to linear case,
ploration which include: brushing tools for selecting glyphs, yellow to planarity and red for spherical case.
pan-and-zoom, and optional display preferences (e.g., con-
Oeltze et. al [OHG∗08] incorporate 3D glyphs for visual-
nectivity lines) for conveying additional data.
izing perfusion parameters in conjunction with their ventric-
ular anatomical context. They propose two glyph designs:
4. Application (a) 3D Bull’s Eye Plot (BEP) Segment and (b) 3D Time-
Intensity Curve (TIC) Miniatures for depicting four per-
Glyph-based visualization is an excellent tool for repre-
fusion parameters: Peak Enhancement (PE), Time To Peak
senting single or multiple data attributes. Whilst generic
(TTP), Integral and Up-slope which describe the myocardial
glyphs are desirable and have been well-studied (e.g., Star
contractility and viability. The 3D BEP segments are ring-
glyphs [SFGF72] and Chernoff faces [Che73]), the effec- shaped glyphs which extend the previous work [CWD∗02]
tiveness of such designs for conveying information are lim-
from 2D to 3D space. An improved glyph (TIC minia-
ited when presented with challenging, complex data forms
tures) enables intuitive mapping of all important parameters
such as vector and tensor data. In addition to various data
in cardiac diagnosis as a result of encoding TIC semantic
type constraints, other factors must be considered. For ex-
metaphors (glyph shape) that is familiar to domain experts.
ample, the sampling resolution greatly affects how small or
They apply their technique on three datasets from a clinical
how large the glyph can be in order to avoid visual clut-
study.
ter (compare to DG2). Thus, we find that many glyphs are
attribute-dependant and that their specific application con- The work by Meyer-Spradow et al. [MSSD∗08] present
text is an integral aspect to the design process. In this sec- an interactive 3D glyph-based approach for the visualization
tion, we report a selection of important papers that focus on of SPECT-based myocardial perfusion data. They utilise a
novel glyph-based visual techniques that have been explored supertorus prototype glyph which characterises SPECT data
and utilised in various scientific domains. based on its colour, opacity, size and roundness. The glyphs
are positioned along a 3D surface (i.e., the myocardium) us-
ing a random distribution with relaxation for depicting in-
4.1. Medical Visualization formation of the underlying tissue. One motivation of such
a placement strategy is to provide a more even-distribution
The recent survey by Ropinski and Preim [RP08, ROP11]
of glyphs. This addresses the problem of unbalanced place-
provides an overview of existing glyph-based visualization
ment that can occur from regular grid sampling in complex
techniques used in the medical domain and propose guide-
and non-uniform meshes (compare to DG11).
lines for developing more valuable glyph representations. A
glyph taxonomy based on the way information is processed
when interpreting glyph visualizations is used to classify
4.2. Event Visualization
such techniques. Within semiotic theory, this consists of a
two-phase information process: 1) pre-attentive processing, Event and activity visualization is a rapidly growing research
that is mainly stimulated by glyph attributes such as size, topic. The work by Botchen et al. [BBS∗08] describe the
colour and shape along with glyph placement, texture map- VideoPerpetuoGram (VPG), a dynamic technique for visu-
ping and glyph filtering and 2) attentive stimuli processes alizing activity recognition found in video streams. This in-
which are based on glyph-interaction paradigms. Examples volves stacking temporally spaced intervals of key video
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 18 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
frames and using colour filled glyphs to represent geomet-
ric information (e.g., object identifier, position, size), seman-
tic information (e.g., action type and inter-object relation)
and statistical information (the certainty and error margins
of the analytical results). They demonstrate their technique
on surveillance video footage for summarizing the motion of
people and actions.
(a) (b) (c)
Pearlman and Rheingans [PR07] introduce a glyph-based
approach for visualizing computer network security using
compound glyphs. The compound glyph representation is a
pie chart in which the size and colour of each segment is
mapped to the amount of activity and the type of service.
One of the motivations of using a simple pie chart design,
(d) (e) (f)
is its ability to extend to the temporal domain by slicing the
glyph as concentric layers for depicting information at dif-
Figure 12: Some designs of metaphoric pictograms for visu-
ferent time instances. Each glyph indicates a node on the alizing event data in Rugby by Legg et al. [LCP∗12]. In (a),
network in which connectivity lines in the visualization rep-
initial stickmen designs were produced to prompt an artist.
resent the communication between nodes. They successfully
The artist produced several different designs: (b) a refined
demonstrate their method on a simulated network consisting
stickman design, (c) contemporary design, (d) a posterised
of a small set client users.
colour design and (e) a silhouette design. In (f) the scrum is
The work by Parry et al. [PLC∗11] introduce a novel event depicted using the silhouette design (cf. (a) and (b))
selection concept for summarising video storyboards. Video
storyboard is a form of video visualization, used to sum-
marise the major events in a video using illustrative visu- ing to learn, remember or guess. Instead, the authors explore
alization. There are three main technical challenges in cre- the use of metaphoric pictograms which are commonly used
ating a video storyboard, (a) event classification, (b) event in many domain-specific visualization (e.g., electronic cir-
selection and (c) event illustration. Among these challenges, cuit diagrams) and visualization for the masses (e.g., road
(a) is highly application-dependent and requires a significant signs). Metaphoric glyphs can come in different forms, rang-
amount of application- specific semantics to be encoded in ing from abstract representation to photographic icons (Fig-
this system or manually specified by the users. This paper ure 12), where the use of appropriate visual channels can
focuses on challenges (b) and (c) which they demonstrate provide semantic cues that are easy to learn, remember or
using a case study on Snooker video visualization. For event guess. The MatchPad adopts a scale-adaptive layout to posi-
illustration, the authors explore a collection of iconic glyphs tion glyphs along a timeline interactively based on the view-
which convey some metaphors in addition to data values for point zoom factor. This minimises glyph occlusion which
event labelling. These include ball objects that vary in size, they demonstrate successfully using a case study on Rugby.
opacity and colour for representing ball trajectory and se-
mantic information (e.g., ball type, event importance), tex-
4.3. Multi-field Visualization
tured circle glyphs and numbered icons for depicting the se-
quences of shots, and a pie chart icon to represent scoring Due to its multivariate characteristics, geometric shapes
and video timing information. are commonly used to represent multiple data attributes.
Superquadrics and Angle-Preserving Transformations by
A more thorough investigation of incorporating visual
Barr [Bar81] presents such an approach by introducing ge-
semantics into glyph designs is explored by Legg et
ometric shapes (superquadrics) used for creating and simu-
al. [LCP∗12]. They describe the MatchPad: an interactive
lating three-dimensional scenes. The author defines a math-
glyph-based visualization for mapping events and actions
ematical framework used to explicitly define a family of
in sports notational analysis. Sports event analysis provides
geometric primitives from which their position, size, and
an example where a large number of event types need to
surface curvature can be altered by modifying a family of
be depicted in a manner to facilitate rapid information re-
different parameters. Example glyphs include: a torus, star-
trieval. A comprehensive review of mapping such data is
shape, ellipsoid, hyperboloid, toroid. Furthermore, the au-
discussed using different levels of abstractions. These in-
thor describes angle-preserving shape transformations that
clude the evaluation of abstract icons and colour for encod-
can be applied to primitives to create geometric effects such
ing each event type. Whilst the approach may be suitable for
as bending or twisting.
data attributes with a small number of enumerative values,
the range of categorical attributes in sports results to many Crawfis and Allison [CA91] introduce a novel approach
different shapes or colours making it cognitively challeng- for visualizing multiple scientific data sets using texture
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 19 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
mapping and raster operations. The interactive programming rate of strain tensor, turbulent charge and turbulent current
framework enables users to overlay different data sets by using a series of visualization techniques such as tensor el-
defining raster functions/operations. Such a function may in- lipses, vector arrows and colour mapping.
clude glyph textures for mapping data attributes (e.g., vec-
tor data). Using a generated synthetic dataset, they present
4.4. Geo-spatial Visualization
a method for reducing the visual clutter by mapping colour
to a height field and using a bump map to represent the vec- We often find that geo-spatial visualization may incorporate
tor and contour plots. The final texture is mapped onto a 3D inter-disciplinary techniques from other domains, and thus
surface. can be classified under more than one category. MacEachren
et al. [MBP98] is such an example where the authors present
Using the set of superquadrics defined by Barr [Bar81],
Shaw et. al [SEK∗98] describe an interactive glyph-based a novel approach to visualize reliability in mortality maps
using a bi-variate mapping. Given a base geographical map
framework for visualizing multi-dimensional data. As op-
(United States), the technique involves using colour filled
posed to the analytical focus in the previous work, the au-
regions to represent the data and texture overlay to represent
thors describe a method for mapping data attributes appro-
the reliability.
priately to shape properties such that visual cues effectively
convey data dimensionality without depreciating the cogni- Healey and Enns introduce a different approach [HE99]
tion of global data patterns. They map in decreasing order of using multi-coloured perceptual texture elements known as
data importance, values to location, size, colour and shape pexels for visualizing multivariate scientific datasets across
(of which two dimensions are encoded by shape). Using su- a height field. The pexels appearance is determined by en-
perellipsoids, they apply their framework to the "thematic" coding attribute values into three texture dimensions: height,
document similarities [SEK∗98] and magnetohydrodynam- density and regularity. Pexels incorporate pre-attentive fea-
ics simulation of the solar wind in the distant heliosphere tures (e.g., height) to improve the accuracy of visual search-
[E∗00], [ES01]. based tasks. To assess its effectiveness, the authors apply
their technique on a typhoon data set where wind speed,
The report by Taylor [Tay02] provides an overview of suc-
pressure and precipitation is mapped to the pexel properties.
cessful and unsuccessful techniques for visualizing multiple
scalar fields on a 2D manifold. The author first hypothesises Pang [Pan01] provides an overview of various geo-spatial
that the largest number of data sets can be displayed by map- uncertainty metrics and identifies two methods for integrat-
ping each field to the following: a unique surface charac- ing this data into a geo-spatial representation: (a) mapping
teristic, applying a different visualization technique to each uncertainty information to graphic attributes (e.g., hue, opac-
scalar field or by using textures/glyphs whose features de- ity) or by using (b) animation to convey uncertainty. By
pend on the data sets. Such a framework revealed limitations treating uncertainty fields as an additional layer of informa-
of up to four scalar fields. This led to the research of two tion in cartography, techniques such as uncertainty glyphs
new techniques that prove effective for visualizing multiple can be visualised independently and overlaid on top of an
scalar fields, (1) data-driven spots (DDS) [Bok03] - using existing geo-spatial visualization.
different spots of various intensities and heights to visual- The work of Sanyal et al. [SZD∗10] introduce glyphs, rib-
ize each data set, and (2) oriented slivers [WEL∗00] - using
bons and spaghetti plots for interactively visualizing ensem-
sliver-like texture glyphs of different orientations for visual-
ble uncertainty in numerical weather models. They demon-
izing multiple scalar fields in which luminance is mapped to
strate their work on the 1933 Superstorm simulation, where
the relative scalar values.
the visual mappings illustrate the statistical errors (e.g.,
One successful technique is developed by Kirby and Laid- mean, standard deviation, interquartile range and 95% con-
law [KML99] who stochastically arrange multiple visual- fidence intervals) in the data.
ization layers to minimize overlap. This paper extends the
work by Laidlaw et. al [LAK∗98] by applying visualization
4.5. Flow Visualization
concepts from oil painting, art and design, to the problems
in fluid mechanics. Given a permutation of layers, a user- In the flow visualization community, De Leeuw and Van
specified importance value is attached to each visualization Wijk [dLvW93] present an interactive probe-glyph for vi-
of increasing weights in order to provide greater emphasis sualizing multiple flow characteristics in a small region. One
to higher layers. Visual cues such as colour and opacity in- focus is the visualization of six components: velocity, curva-
dicate regions and layers of importance (e.g., Rate of strain ture, shear, acceleration, torsion and convergence. In order
tensor example emphasise the velocity more by using black to facilitate such a mapping, the authors incorporate a larger
arrows). This method enables the simultaneous depiction of glyph design. The core components of the glyph consists of
6-9 data attributes, in which the authors apply to a simulated the following: 1) a curved vector arrow where the length
2D flow field past a cylinder at different reynolds number. and direction represents the velocity and the curvedness is
The example shows the visualization of velocity, vorticity, mapped to the curvature, 2) a membrane perpendicular to the
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 20 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
nique commonly used for depicting wind magnitude and di-
rection in weather visualizations. For both magnitude and di-
rection, users had to estimate the value at a given point and
estimate the average value over a rectangular region. The au-
thors use a real hurricane simulation data set in their study.
Hlawatsch et al. [HLNW11] introduce a glyph for vi-
sualizing unsteady flow with static images. The flow-radar
(glyph) is constructed by transforming time-dependant vec-
tor attributes into polar co-ordinates, whereby vector direc-
tion is mapped to angle, and the time to radius. In addition,
the velocity magnitude is encoded using colour. The radar
glyphs provides a visual summary of the flow over multi-
ple time steps. A method for visualizing flow uncertainty is
described using a single arc that represents the angular varia-
tion at given seed point. The authors demonstrate their work
on two CFD simulation data set.
Figure 13: The visualization of vector field clustering of flow
Peng et al. [PGL∗12] describe an automatic vector field
around an engine. A combination of |v|-range and θ-range
clustering algorithm and presents visualization techniques
glyph is used for depicting the range of vector magnitude
and direction in each vector cluster [PGL∗12] that incorporate statistical-based multivariate glyphs. The
authors clustering algorithm is given by: 1) derive a mesh
resolution value for each vertex, 2) encode vector and mesh
resolution values into R, G, B and α in image space. Clusters
flow where its displacement to the centre is mapped to accel- naturally form in this space based on pixel intensity. 3) the
eration, 3) candy stripes on the surface of the velocity arrow clusters are merged depending on a similarity value derived
illustrates the amount of torsion, 4) a ring describes the plane using euclidean distance, mesh resolution, average velocity
perpendicular to the flow over time (shear-plane), and finally magnitude and velocity direction. A collection of clustering
5) the convergence and divergence of the flow is mapped to a glyph-based visualizations are introduced, such as |v|-range
lens or osculating paraboloid. Placement of such probes are glyph or “disc” (Figure 13 for example) that depicts the local
interactively placed by the users along a streamline to show minimum and maximum vector. The inner and outer radius
local features in more detail. of the disc is mapped to the vector magnitudes. The θ-range
glyph combines a vector glyph that illustrates the average ve-
Vector Plots for Irregular Grids Dovey [Dov95] extends
locity direction and magnitude, and a semi-transparent cone
Crawfis and Max’s method [CM92] from regular to curvi-
that shows the variance of vector field direction. Other visu-
linear and unstructured grids. In order to visualize vector
alizations include streamlets that are traced from the cluster
fields on unstructured grids, physical space and parameter
centre, and colour coding with mean velocity. The authors
space resampling methods are employed. During the phys-
demonstrate their clustering results on a series of synthetic
ical space resampling, the vector field is linearly interpo-
and real-world CFD meshes.
lated at each sample point, then the physical coordinates of
the point are calculated, and lastly related oriented glyphs
4.6. Tensor Visualization
(plots) are projected from back to front. Although this en-
sures that sample points are uniformly distributed, physical The work of Laidlaw et al. [LAK∗98] presents two novel
space resampling is computationally expensive. To address methods for visualizing Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI).
this problem, it may be preferable to resample to parameter The first method uses normalised ellipsoids, where the prin-
space instead. At first, random points are directly generated cipal axes and radii are mapped to the tensor eigen vectors
in parametric space with an area-weighted distribution. Then and eigen values respectively. Glyph normalisation reduces
a relatively accurate and dense resampling can be approxi- the visual clutter and enables full depiction of the data set.
mated by mapping the parameterised coordinate to physical The second method incorporates concepts from oil painting
coordinate grid points. Vector field visualization on arbitrary to represent seven tensor data attributes as multiple layers of
3D surfaces can be efficiently achieved with parameter space varying brush strokes which is composited into a single visu-
resampling. alization. The authors demonstrate their technique on DTIs
Martin et al. [MII∗08] present a study to validate the ef- of healthy and diseased mouse spinal cords.
fectiveness of traditional 2D hurricane visualizations by ob- Building upon previous research by Barr [Bar81] and
serving the users ability to mentally integrate the magnitude Westin et al. [WMM∗02], Kindlmann [Kin04] introduces
and direction of flow in a vector field. In particular, the au- a novel approach of visualizing tensor fields using su-
thors focus on evaluating 2D glyphs (or wind barb) - a tech- perquadric glyphs. The motivation of superquadric tensor
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 21 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
glyphs addresses the problems of asymmetry and ambi- used to encode other important tensor quantities. To facili-
guity prone in previous techniques (e.g. cuboids and el- tate quick visual exploration of the data from different view-
lipsoids). An explicit and implicit parameterisation of su- points and at different resolutions, the authors employ an ef-
perquadric primitives is presented, along with geometric ficient image-space approach in which hyperstreamlines and
anisotropy metrics c
l
, cp, cs [WMM∗02] and user-controlled glyphs are generated quickly in the image plane. The combi-
edge sharpness parameter γ, to create a barycentric triangular nation of these techniques leads to an efficient tensor field vi-
domain of shapes that change in shape, flatness and orienta- sualization system for domain scientists. They demonstrate
tion under different parameter values. A subset of the family the effectiveness of their visualization technique through ap-
of superquadrics is chosen and applied towards visualizing plications of complex simulated engine fluid flow and earth-
a DT-MRI tensor field which is then compared against an quake deformation data.
equivalent ellipsoid visualization.
Kriz et al. [KYHR05] provides a review of visualization
4.7. Uncertainty Visualization
techniques on second-order tensors which include: Lame’s
stress ellipsoids, Haber glyphs [Hab90], Reynolds tensor A number of approaches have been used to quantify and vi-
glyph [HYW03], and hyper streamtubes [DH93]. Further- sualize uncertainty. In particular, glyphs are well suited for
more, the authors introduce a Principal, Normal and Shear illustrating uncertainty, detailed by the early work of Wit-
(PNS) glyph for visualizing stress tensors and their gradi- tenbrink et al. [WPL96] who evaluates the effective use of
ents. The method extends the stress ellipsoids by mapping glyphs for visualizing uncertainty in vector fields simulated
the shearing stress component to the surface colour of the from winds and ocean currents. Several uncertainty metrics
ellipsoid. are depicted simultaneously such as direction, magnitude as
well as mean direction and length using a variety of glyph at-
Kindlmann extends his previous work [Kin04] to glyph-
tributes that are commonly mapped (e.g., length, area, colour
packing [KW06], a novel glyph placement strategy. The goal
and/or angles). Lodha et al. [LPSW96] presents a system
of this work is to improve upon the discrete nature of glyph-
(UFLOW) for visualizing uncertainties in fluid flow. The
based visualization through the use of regular grid sampling,
system analyses the changes that occur from different inte-
to a more continuous character such as texture-based meth-
grators and step-sizes used for computing streamlines. The
ods by packing the glyphs into the field. A tensor-based po-
authors visualize the differences between each streamlines
tential energy is defined to derive the placement of a sys-
using several approaches such as glyphs that encode the un-
tem of particles whose finals positions will be used to place
certainty through their shape, size and colour.
glyphs. Hlawitschka et al. [HSH07] presents an alternative
glyph packing using Delaunay triangulation which success- Pang et al. [PWL96] and Verma and Pang [VP04] present
fully reduces the computation cost. comparative visualization tools to analyse differences be-
tween two datasets. Streamlines and stream ribbons are gen-
More recently, Schultz and Kindlmann [SK10] introduce
erated on two datasets, one being a sub-sampled version of
superquadric glyphs that can be used to visualize the general
the other. To compare streamlines, the euclidean distance be-
symmetric second order tensors that could be non-positive-
tween them is used. Glyphs are added to aid the user in see-
definite. The work extends previous glyph-based methods
ing how a pair of streamlines differ. Brown [Bro04] demon-
(e.g., [Kin04], [WMM∗02]) which concerntrate on tensors
strates the use of vibrations to visualize data uncertainty.
with strictly positive eigenvalues such as diffusion tensors, to
Experiments using oscillations in vertex displacement, and
the general case by mapping the glyph shape to show eigen-
changes in luminance and hue are investigated.
value sign differences. The shape between two eignvectors is
convex if the corresponding eigenvalues have the same sign, MacEachren et al. [MRO∗12] is another instance of em-
and concave if they are different. pirical research that evaluates the effects of visualizing
different categories of uncertainty using discrete symbols.
Chen et al. [CPL∗11] present a novel asymmetric tensor
Building upon the theoretical framework by Bertin [Ber83]
field visualization method to provide important insight into
on visual semiotics, they provide insight on the effects of us-
fluid flows and solid deformations. Existing techniques for
ing abstract symbols that vary only a single visual variable
asymmetric tensor fields focus on the analysis, and simply
(e.g., shape, hue, orientation) in comparison to iconic sym-
use evenly-spaced hyperstreamlines on surfaces following
bols that are of more pictorial form. Both sets of symbols
eigenvectors and dual-eigenvectors in the tensor field. They
underwent two distinct experiments which focus on assess-
describe a hybrid visualization technique in which hyper-
ing their intuitiveness for representing different categories of
streamlines and elliptical glyphs are used in real and com-
uncertainty and effectiveness for a typical map use task: as-
plex domains, respectively. This enables a more faithful rep-
sessing and comparing the aggregate uncertainty in two map
resentation of flow behaviours inside complex domains. In
regions.
addition, tensor magnitude, which is an important quantity
in tensor field analysis is mapped to the density of hyper- Ribicic et al. [RWG∗12] describe an interactive sketch-
streamlines and sizes of glyphs. This allows colours to be based visualization system for investigating simulation mod-
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 22 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
els and assess the uncertainty associated with changing dif- encourage more empirical studies on high dimensional glyph
ferent numeric parameters. In particular, the authors demon- representations. As we mentioned in Section 1, glyph-based
strate their approach on flood management simulation as a visualization essentially offers a form of dictionary-based
means of risk assessment. Such an approach provides an in- compression. Naturally, this allows us to draw inspiration,
tuitive mechanism for transforming sketches into boundary theories and techniques from established disciplines, such as
conditions of a simulation and to deliver visual feedback to data communication and historical linguistics, and research
end-users. A set of glyphs and icons are used to depict var- subjects such as information theory, data compression, and
ious simulation attributes. These include vector glyphs for lexicography. Perhaps more ambitiously, the field of visu-
illustrating the force field on a water flow and ensemble han- alization may channel more energy and innovation into the
dle glyphs for representing uncertainty values. development of a common framework, which may one day
become the basis of a common visualization language.
5. Summary and Conclusions
6. Acknowledgmenets
In this state of the art report, we have presented a compre-
The authors wish to thank all participants of the Work-
hensive survey of the subject of glyph-based visualization.
shop on Glyph-based Visualization, which was held
In particular, we have made connection between glyphs and
on 7-8 May 2012, and in particular the keynote speak-
the history of signs and perceptual studies on visual channels
ers of the workshop, Professor Colin Ware (University
and the use of icons. We have brought together a substantial
of New Hampshire, USA) and Professor Sine Mc-
collection of design criteria and guidelines. We have exam-
Dougall (Bournemouth University, UK). Parts of this
ined a variety of methods and algorithms for visual mapping,
work have also been funded by the Austrian Science
computing spatial layout, rendering glyphs and supporting
Fund (FWF) through the ViMaL project (No. P21695).
glyph-based interaction. Noticeably, we have gathered an in-
disputable set of evidence in different applications, suggest-
ing that glyph-based visualization is useful and can bring
about cost-effective benefits in many data-intensive tasks. References
While this survey has confirmed that glyph-based visual- [ABK98] ANKERST M., BERCHTOLD S., KEIM D.: Similarity
ization is an important technique in the field of visualiza- clustering of dimensions for an enhanced visualization of multi-
dimensional data. In Information Visualization, 1998. Proceed-
tion, we have also observed some doubts in the commu-
ings. IEEE Symposium on (oct 1998), pp. 52 –60, 153. 11
nity about the encoding capability of glyphs primarily due
[Bar81] BARR A. H.: Superquadrics and angle-preserving trans-
to its size, limited capacity of individual visual channels and
formations. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 1, 1 (Jan.
cognitive demand for learning and memorization. Although 1981), 11–23. 14, 17, 18, 19
such reservations are very reasonable and cannot be over-
[Bar04] BAR M.: Visual objects in context. Nature reviews. Neu-
looked in any practical applications, they do not undermine roscience 5, 8 (2004), 617–629. 8
the relative merits of glyph-based visualization, which have [BARM∗12] BORGO R., ABDUL-RAHMAN A., MOHAMED F.,
already been demonstrated in everyday life as well as many GRANT P. W., REPPA I., FLORIDI L., CHEN M.: An empirical
applications. These merits include: study on using visual embellishments in visualization. to appear
in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
• rapid semantic interpretation (e.g., traffic (2012). 8
signs [LCP∗12]), [BBS∗08] BOTCHEN R. P., BACHTHALER S., SCHICK F., CHEN
• more scalability in dimensions for multivariate data visu- M., MORI G., WEISKOPF D., ERTL T.: Action-based multifield
alization (e.g., [Kin04, SK10]), video visualization. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer
Graphics 14, 4 (2008), 885–899. 16
• suitable for both dense and sparse layout (e.g., [KW06,
LKH09, LHD∗04, LCP∗12]), [Ber83] BERTIN J.: Semiology of graphics. Univ. of Wisconsin
Press, 1983. 5, 8, 11, 20
• no significant disadvantage in learning and memorization
(e.g., [MdBC00]), [Bly82] BLY S.: Presenting information in sound. In Proceedings
of the 1982 conference on Human factors in computing systems
• can be evolved into a standard form (e.g., many schematic
(1982), CHI ’82, ACM, pp. 371–375. 3
diagrams),
[Bok03] BOKINSKY A. A.: Multivariate data visualization with
• can be evolved into a language (e.g., grapheme-based lan-
data-driven spots. 18
guages).
[Bre99] BREWER C.: Color use guidelines for data representa-
This survey has also helped us identify major gaps in the tion. In Proc. Section on Statistical Graphics (1999), pp. 55–60.
15
current research on glyph-based visualization. While exist-
ing perception studies on visual channels and icons have pro- [Bro04] BROWN R.: Animated visual vibrations as an uncertainty
visualisation technique. In Proceedings of the 2nd international
vided a concrete foundation for glyph-based visualization,
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques in
most findings are directly applicable only to glyph represen- Australasia and South East Asia (2004), GRAPHITE ’04, ACM,
tations in three or fewer dimensions. We hence would like to pp. 84–89. 20
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 23 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
[BS92] BORG I., STAUFENBIEL T.: Performance of snow flakes, [E∗00] EBERT D. S., ET AL.: Procedural shape generation for
suns, and factorial suns in the graphical representation of mul- multi-dimensional data visualization. Computers and Graphics
tivariate data. Multivariate Behavioral Research 27, 1 (1992), 24, 3 (June 2000), 375–384. 18
43–55. 11
[Eco79] ECO U.: A theory of semiotics. Advances in semiotics.
[BSG89] BLATTNER M. M., SUMIKAWA D. A., GREENBERG Indiana University Press, 1979. 4, 7
R. M.: Earcons and icons: Their structure and common design [EM91] ELIADE M., MAIRET P.: Images and symbols: studies in
principles. Human-Computer Interaction 4, 1 (1989), 11–44. 3 religious symbolism. Mythos: The Princepto/Bollingen Series in
[BSMWE78] BURNS B., SHEPP B. E., MCDONOUGH D., World Mythology. Princeton University Press, 1991. 2
WIENER-EHRLICH W. K.: The relation between stimulus an- [ES01] EBERT D. S., SHAW C. D.: Minimally immersive
alyzability and perceived dimensional structure. The Psychology flow visualization. In IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
of Learning and Motivation (1978), 77–115. 8 Computer Graphics (2001), vol. 7(4), IEEE Computer Society,
[BT07] BORLAND D., TAYLOR R.: Rainbow color map (still) pp. 343–350. 18
considered harmful. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications [FK03] FRIENDLY M., KWAN E.: Effect ordering for data dis-
27, 2 (2007), 14–17. 13 plays. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 43, 4 (Aug. 2003), 509–539.
[CA91] CRAWFIS R., ALLISON M. J.: A scientific visualization 11
synthesizer. In IEEE Visualization (1991), pp. 262–267. 17 [Gay89] GAYER W. W.: The sonicfinder: An interface that uses
[CF12] CHEN M., FLORIDI L.: An analysis of information in auditory icons (abstract only). SIGCHI Bull. 21 (August 1989).
visualisation. to appear in Synthese (2012). 7 3
[Cha02] CHANDLER D.: Semiotics: The Basics. Routledge, 2002. [Gog03] GOGUEN J.: Semiotic morphisms, representations, and
4 blending for user interface design. In AMAST Proceedings
(2003), pp. 1–15. 5
[Che73] CHERNOFF H.: The use of faces to represent points in
k-dimensional space graphically. J. American Statistical Associ-
[Gre98] GREEN M.: Toward a perceptual science of multidimen-
sional data visualization: Bertin and beyond. ERGO/GERO Hu-
ation 68, 342 (1973), 361–368. 14, 16
man Factors Science (1998), 1–30. 8
[Chr75] CHRIST R.: Review and analysis of color coding research
for visual displays. Human Factors 17, 6 (1975), 542–570. 6, 13
[Hab90] HABER R. B.: Visualization techniques for engineering
mechanics. Computing Systems in Engineering 1, 1 (1990), 37–
[CLP∗13] CHUNG D. H. S., LEGG P. A., PARRY M. L., BOWN 50. 20
R., GRIFFITHS I. W., LARAMEE R. S., CHEN M.: Glyph sort-
[HBE96] HEALEY C., BOOTH K., ENNS J.: High-speed visual
ing: Interactive visualization for multi-dimensional data (under
estimation using preattentive processing. ACM Trans. Computer-
review). 8, 9, 16
Human Interaction 3 (1996), 107–135. 6, 14
[CM84a] CLEVELAND W., MCGILL R.: Graphical perception:
[HE99] HEALEY C., ENNS J.: Large datasets at a glance: Com-
Theory, experimentation, and application to the development of
bining textures and colors in scientific visualization. IEEE Trans.
graphical methods. J. American Statistical Association 79, 387
Visualization and Computer Graphics 5, 2 (1999), 145–167. 14,
(1984), 531–554. 6, 14
18
[CM84b] CLEVELAND W., MCGILL R.: Graphical perception:
[HE11] HEALEY C. G., ENNS J. T.: Attention and visual mem-
Theory, experimentation, and application to the development of
ory in visualization and computer graphics. IEEE Transactions
graphical methods. J. American Statistical Association 79, 387
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 7 (2011), 1170–
(1984), 531–554. 7
1188. 8
[CM92] CRAWFIS R., MAX N.: Direct volume visualization of [HI72] HANDELT S., IMAI S.: The free classification of ana-
three-dimensional vector fields. In Proceedings of the Workshop lyzable and unanalyzable stimuli. Attention, Perception, & Psy-
on Volume Visualization (New York, Oct. 19–20 1992), Acm chophysics 12, 1 (1972), 108–224. 8
Press, pp. 55–60. 19
[HLNW11] HLAWATSCH M., LEUBE P., NOWAK W.,
[CM93] CRAWFIS R., MAX N.: Texture splats for 3D scalar and WEISKOPF D.: Flow radar glyphs - static visualization of
vector field visualization. In Proc. IEEE Visualization (1993), unsteady flow with uncertainty. In IEEE Transactions on Visual-
pp. 261–266. 11, 14, 15 ization and Computer Graphics (2011), vol. 17, pp. 1949–1958.
[CPL∗11] CHEN G., PALKE D., LIN Z., YEH H., VINCENT P., 19
LARAMEE R. S., ZHANG E.: Asymmetric tensor field visualiza- [HS09] HAUSER H., SCHUMANN H.: Visualization pipeline. In
tion for surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com- Encyclopedia of Database Systems, Liu, Özsu, (Eds.). Springer,
puter Graphics 17, 6 (2011). 20 2009, pp. 3414–3416. 10
[CWD∗02] CERQUEIRA M. D., WEISSMAN N. J., DILSIZIAN [HSH07] HLAWITSCHKA M., SCHEUERMANN G., HAMANN
V., ET AL.: Standardized myocardial segmentation and nomen- B.: Interactive glyph placement for tensor fields. In Advances
clature for tomographic imaging of the heart. Circulation 105, 4 in Visual Computing (2007), pp. I: 331–340. 20
(2002), 539–542. 16
[HYW03] HASHASH Y. M. A., YAO J. I.-C., WOTRING D. C.:
[DH93] DELMARCELLE T., HESSELINK L.: Visualization of Glyph and hyperstreamline representation of stress and strain ten-
second order tensor fields with hyperstreamlines. IEEE Com- sors and material constitutive response. International Journal
puter Graphics and Applications 13, 4 (1993), 25–33. 20 for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics 27, 7
(2003), 603–626. 20
[dLvW93] DE LEEUW W. C., VAN WIJK J. J.: A probe for lo-
cal flow field visualization. In Proc. IEEE Visualization (1993), [IG98] INTERRANTE V., GROSCH C.: Visualizing 3D flow. IEEE
pp. 39–45. 11, 15, 18 Computer Graphics and Applications 18, 4 (1998), 49–53. 15
[Dov95] DOVEY D.: Vector plots for irregular grids. In IEEE [JL02] JOHANSEN J., LARSEN S.: Signs in use: an introduction
Visualization (1995), pp. 248–253. 19 to semiotics. Routledge, 2002. 3, 4
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 24 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
[Joh88] JOHANSEN J.: The Distinction between Icon, Index, and [Mac86] MACKINLAY J.: Automating the design of graphical
Symbol in the Study of Literature. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, presentations of relational information. ACM Trans. Graph. 5,
1988. 5 2 (Apr. 1986), 110–141. 5, 7
[KE01] KRAUS M., ERTL T.: Interactive data exploration with [Mac04] MACEACHREN A. M.: How Maps Work - Representa-
customized glyphs. In Proc. WSCG (2001), pp. 20–23. 14 tion, Visualization, and Design. Guilford Press, 2004. 5
[KG07] KARVE A., GLEICHER M.: Glyph-based overviews of [Mar03] MARCUS A.: Icons, symbols, and signs: visible lan-
large datasets in structural bioinformatics. In Proceedings of the guages to facilitate communication. interactions 10 (May 2003),
11th International Conference on Information Visualization (IV 37–43. 3
2007) (jul 2007), pp. 1–6. 9
[MBP98] MACEACHREN A. M., BREWER C. A., PICKLE
[Kin04] KINDLMANN G.: Superquadric tensor glyphs. In Proc. L. W.: Visualizing georeferenced data: Representing reliability
Symp. Data Visualization (VisSym) (2004), pp. 147–154. 14, 19, of health statistics. Evironment and Planning A (1998), 1547–
20, 21 1561. 18
[KMDH11] KEHRER J., MUIGG P., DOLEISCH H., HAUSER H.: [MCdB99] MCDOUGALL S., CURRY M., DE BRUIJN O.: Mea-
Interactive visual analysis of heterogeneous scientific data across suring symbol and icon characteristics: Norms for concreteness,
an interface. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics complexity, meaningfulness, familiarity, and semantic distance
17, 7 (2011), 934–946. 15 for 239 symbols. Behavior Research Methods 31 (1999), 487–
519. 9
[KML99] KIRBY R., MARMANIS H., LAIDLAW D.: Visualizing
multivalued data from 2D incompressible flows using concepts [MdBC00] MCDOUGALL S., DE BRUIJN O., CURRY M.: Ex-
from painting. In Proc. IEEE Visualization (1999), pp. 333–340. ploring the effects of icon characteristics on user performance:
11, 18 The role of icon concreteness, complexity, and distinctiveness.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 6 (2000), 291–306.
[KT75] KRANTZ D., TVERSKY A.: Similarity of rectangles: An
8, 9, 10, 21
analysis of subjective dimensions. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology 12, 1 (1975), 4–34. 8 [MII∗08] MARTIN J. P., II J. E. S., II R. J. M., LIU Z., CAI S.:
Results of a user study on 2D hurricane visualization. Computer
[KW79] KINCHLA R., WOLFE J.: The order of visual process-
Graphics Forum 27, 3 (2008), 991–998. 19
ing: "top-down," "bottom-up", or "middle-out". Perception &
psychophysics 25, 3 (1979). 8 [MRO∗12] MACEACHREN A. M., ROTH R. E., O’BRIEN J., LI
[KW06] KINDLMANN G., WESTIN C.-F.: Diffusion tensor vi-
B., SWINGLEY D., GAHEGAN M.: Visualizing semiotics & un-
certainty visualization. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer
sualization with glyph packing. IEEE Trans. Visualization and
Graphics 18, 12 (2012), 2496–2505. 20
Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 1329–1336. 11, 15, 20, 21
[KYHR05] KRIZ R. D., YAMAN M., HARTING M., RAY A. A.:
[MRSS∗12] MAGUIRE E., ROCCA-SERRA P., SANSONE S.-A.,
Visualization of Zeroth, Second, Fourth, Higher Order Tensors,
DAVIES J., CHEN M.: Taxonomy-based Glyph Design – with a
Case Study on Visualizing Workflows of Biological Experiments.
and Invariance of Tensor Equations. Computers and Graphics
to appear in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
21, 6 (2005), 1–13. 20
Graphics 18 (2012), –. 8, 10, 14, 15
[Lak95] LAKOFF G.: The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor.
Metaphor and Thought, A. Ortony (2nd Ed.) (1995), 202,252. 7
[MSSD∗08] MEYER-SPRADOW J., STEGGER L., DÖRING C.,
ROPINSKI T., HINRICHS K.: Glyph-based SPECT visualiza-
[LAK∗98] LAIDLAW D. H., AHRENS E. T., KREMERS D., tion for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. IEEE Trans-
AVALOS M. J., JACOBS R. E., READHEAD C.: Visualizing actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14, 6 (2008),
diffusion tensor images of the mouse spinal cord. In IEEE Vi- 1499–1506. 15, 16
sualization (1998), pp. 127–134. 15, 18, 19
[MTL78] MCGILL R., TUKEY J., LARSEN W.: Variations of box
[LCP∗12] LEGG P. A., CHUNG D. H. S., PARRY M. L., JONES plots. The American Statistician 32 (1978), 12–16. 12
M. W., LONG R., GRIFFITHS I. W., CHEN M.: Matchpad: Inter-
active glyph-based visualization for real-time sports performance
[Nav77] NAVON D.: Forest before trees: The precedence of global
features in visual perception. Cognitive psychology 9, 3 (1977),
analysis. Computer Graphics Forum 31, 3pt4 (2012), 1255–
353–736. 8
1264. 15, 17, 21
[LHD∗04] LARAMEE R., HAUSER H., DOLEISCH H., VROLIJK [NC08] NG A. W., CHAN A. H.: Visual and cognitive features on
icon effectiveness. Lecture Notes in Engineering and Computer
B., POST F., WEISKOPF D.: The state of the art in flow visual-
Science 2169 (2008), 1856U˝ 1859. 10
ization: Dense and texture-based techniques. Computer Graphics
Forum 23, 2 (2004), 203–221. 2, 21 [Nor02] NORMAN D. A.: The Design of Everyday Things. Basic
Books, 2002. 8
[LKH09] LIE A. E., KEHRER J., HAUSER H.: Critical design
and realization aspects of glyph-based 3D data visualization. In [OHG∗08] OELTZE S., HENNEMUTH A., GLASSER S., KÜH-
Proc. Spring Conference on Computer Graphics (SCCG 2009) NEL C., PREIM B.: Glyph-based visualization of myocardial
(2009), pp. 27–34. 2, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21 perfusion data and enhancement with contractility and viability
information. In Proceedings of the First Eurographics conference
[LMvW10] LI J., MARTENS J.-B., VAN WIJK J. J.: A model
on Visual Computing for Biomedicine (2008), EG VCBM’08,
of symbol size discrimination in scatterplots. In Proc. Human
pp. 11–20. 16
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’10) (2010), pp. 2553–2562.
6, 13 [Ort93] ORTONY A.: Metaphor and thought. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1993. 7
[LPSW96] LODHA S. K., PANG A., SHEEHAN R. E., WITTEN-
BRINK C. M.: UFLOW: Visualizing uncertainty in fluid flow. In [Pal77] PALMER S.: Hierarchical structure in perceptual repre-
IEEE Visualization (1996), pp. 249–254. 20 sentation. Cognitive Psychology 9, 4 (1977), 441–915. 8
[LRW99] LOVE B., ROUDER J., WISNIEWSKI E.: A structural [Pan01] PANG A.: Visualizing uncertainty in geo-spatial data.
account of global and local processing. Cognitive psychology 38, In In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Intersections between
2 (1999), 291–607. 8 Geospatial Information and Information Technology (2001). 18
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 25 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
[PB55] PEIRCE C., BUCHLER J. E.: The Philosophical Writings [RTB96] ROGOWITZ B. E., TREINISH L. A., BRYSON S.: How
of Peirce. New York: Dover, 1955. 3, 5 not to lie with visualization. Comput. Phys. 10 (1996), 268–273.
12
[Pei02] PEIRCE C.: The New Elements of Mathematics. 1902. 3,
10 [Rum70] RUMELHART D. E.: A multicomponent theory of the
perception of briefly exposed visual displays. Journal of Math.
[Pet10] PETTERSSON R.: Information design−principles and
Psych. 7, 2 (1970), 191–218. 8
guidelines. Journal of Visual Literacy 29, 2 (2010), 167–182.
6, 9 [RWG∗12] RIBICIC H., WASER J., GURBAT R., SADRANSKY
B., GROLLER M. E.: Sketching uncertainty into simulations.
[PG88] PICKETT R., GRINSTEIN G.: Iconographic displays for
IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 12 (2012),
visualizing multidimensional data. In Systems, Man, and Cyber-
2255–2264. 20
netics, 1988. Proceedings of the 1988 IEEE International Con-
ference on (1988), pp. 514–519. 11, 15 [SBSR83] SAUSSURE F., BALLY C., SECHEHAYE A.,
[PGL∗12] PENG Z., GRUNDY E., LARAMEE R., CHEN G.,
C
R
o
IE
u
D
rt
L
C
IN
la
G
ss
E
i
R
cs.
A
O
.
p
:
en C
C
o
o
u
u
rt
r
,
se
198
in
3.
g
5
eneral linguistics. Open
CROFT N.: Mesh-driven vector field clustering and visualization:
An image-based approach. IEEE Transactions on Visualization [SEK∗98] SHAW C. D., EBERT D. S., KUKLA J. M., ZWA A.,
and Computer Graphics (TVCG) 18, 5 (2012), 283–298. 19 SOBOROFF I., ROBERTS D. A.: Data visualization using au-
tomatic, perceptually-motivated shapes. In In Proceedings of
[PKH04] PIRINGER H., KOSARA R., HAUSER H.: Interactive
SPIE 3298, Visual Data Exploration and Analysis V (apr 1998),
focus+context visualization with linked 2D/3D scatterplots. In
pp. 208–213. 18
Proc. Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization
(CMV) (2004), pp. 49–60. 15 [SFGF72] SIEGEL J., FARRELL E., GOLDWYN R., FRIEDMAN
H.: The surgical implication of physiologic patterns in myocar-
[PL09] PENG Z., LARAMEE R. S.: Higher dimensional vector dial infarction shock. Surgery 72 (1972), 27–35. 16
field visualization: A survey. In TPCG (2009), pp. 149–163. 2
[She64] SHEPARD R.: Attention and the metric structure of the
[PLC∗11] PARRY M. L., LEGG P. A., CHUNG D. H. S., GRIF- stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 1, 1 (1964),
FITHS I. W., CHEN M.: Hierarchical event selection for video 54–141. 8
storyboards with a case study on snooker video visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17 [Sii02] SIIRTOLA H.: The effect of data-relatedness in interactive
(2011), 1747–1756. 17 glyphs. In Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Information Visualization (2002),
869–876. 8
[PR07] PEARLMAN J., RHEINGANS P.: Visualizing network se-
curity events using compound glyphs from a service-oriented [SK10] SCHULTZ T., KINDLMANN G.: Superquadric glyphs for
perspective. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Visualization symmetric second-order tensors. IEEE Trans. Visualization and
for Computer Security (2007), pp. 131–146. 17 Computer Graphics 16, 6 (2010), 1595–1604. 20, 21
[PVH∗03] POST F., VROLIJK B., HAUSER H., LARAMEE R., [STH02] STOLTE C., TANG D., HANRAHAN P.: Polaris: A sys-
DOLEISCH H.: The state of the art in flow visualisation: Feature tem for query, analysis, and visualization of multidimensional
extraction and tracking. Computer Graphics Forum 22, 4 (2003), relational databases. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer
775–792. 2 Graphics 8, 1 (2002), 52–65. 12
[PWL96] PANG A., WITTENBRINK C., LODHA S.: AP- [SZD∗10] SANYAL J., ZHANG S., DYER J., MERCER A., AM-
PROACHES TO UNCERTAINTY VISUALIZATION. Technical BURN P., MOORHEAD R.: Noodles: A tool for visualization of
Report UCSC-CRL-96-21, University of California, Santa Cruz, numerical weather model ensemble uncertainty. IEEE Transac-
Jack Baskin School of Engineering, Sept. 1996. 20 tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16, 6 (Nov./Dec.
2010), 1421–1430. 18
[PWR04] PENG W., WARD M., RUNDENSTEINER E.: Clutter
reduction in multi-dimensional data visualization using dimen- [Tay02] TAYLOR R.: Visualizing multiple fields on the same sur-
sion reordering. In Proc. IEEE Symp. Information Visualization face. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 22, 3 (2002),
(2004), pp. 89–96. 11, 14 6–10. 18
[QH87] QUINLAN P., HUMPHREYS G.: Visual search for targets
[TG88] TREISMAN A., GORMICAN S.: Feature analysis in early
vision: evidence from search asymmetries. Psychol Rev 95, 1
defined by combinations of color, shape, and size: an examina-
(Jan 1988), 15–48. 8
tion of the task constraints on feature and conjunction searches.
Perception & psychophysics 41, 5 (1987), 455–527. 7, 8 [Tou97] TOUTIN T.: Qualitative aspects of chromo-stereoscopy
for depth-perception. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
[RAEM94] RIBARSKY W., AYERS E., EBLE J., MUKHERJEA
Sensing 63, 2 (1997), 193–203. 15
S.: Glyphmaker: Creating customized visualizations of complex
data. IEEE Computer, 7 (1994), 57–64. 14 [Tre99] TREINISH L.: Task-specific visualization design. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 19, 5 (1999), 72–77. 11,
[ROP11] ROPINSKI T., OELTZE S., PREIM B.: Survey of glyph-
15
based visualization techniques for spatial multivariate medical
data. Computers & Graphics 35, 2 (2011), 392–401. 2, 7, 8, [TS82] TOURANGEAU R., STERNBERG R. J.: Understanding
10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and appreciating metaphors. Cognition (1982), 203–244. 7
[RP08] ROPINSKI T., PREIM B.: Taxonomy and usage guidelines [TSWS05] TOMINSKI C., SCHULZE-WOLLGAST P., SCHU-
for glyph-based medical visualization. In Proc. Simulation and MANN H.: 3D information visualization for time-dependent data
Visualization (SimVis) (2008), pp. 121–138. 2, 10, 11, 16 on maps. In Proc. Int’l. Conf. Information Visualization (IV ’05)
[RSMS∗07] ROPINSKI T., SPECHT M., MEYER-SPRADOW J., (2005), pp. 175–181. 11
HINRICHS K., PREIM B.: Surface glyphs for visualizing multi- [VP04] VERMA V., PANG A.: Comparative flow visualization.
modal volume data. In Proc. Vision, Modeling, and Visualization IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 10,
(VMV) (2007), pp. 3–12. 11, 12, 13, 15 6 (Nov./Dec. 2004), 609–624. 20
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.

--- PAGE 26 ---
R. Borgo et al. / Glyph-based Visualization
[War02] WARD M.: A taxonomy of glyph placement strategies
for multidimensional data visualization. Information Visualiza-
tion 1, 3/4 (2002), 194–210. 10, 12, 15
[War04] WARE C.: Information Visualization: Perception for De-
sign, second edition ed. Morgan Kaufmann, 2004. 14
[War08] WARD M.: Multivariate data glyphs: Principles and
practice. In Handbook of Data Visualization, Chen C.-H., Här-
dle W., Unwin A., (Eds.), Springer Handbooks Comp. Statistics.
Springer, 2008, pp. 179–198. 2, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15
[WB97] WONG P. C., BERGERON R. D.: Multivariate visualiza-
tion using metric scaling. In Vis1997 (1997), pp. 111–118. 15
[WCG94] WANG Q., CAVANAGH P., GREEN M.: Familiarity and
pop-out in visual search. Perception & psychophysics 56, 5 (Nov
1994), 495–500. 8
[WEL∗00] WEIGLE C., EMIGH W. G., LIU G., TAYLOR R. M.,
ENNS J. T., HEALEY C. G.: Oriented sliver textures: A tech-
nique for local value estimation of multiple scalar fields. In
Graphics Interface (2000), Canadian Human-Computer Commu-
nications Society, pp. 163–170. 18
[WG11] WARD M., GUO Z.: Visual exploration of time-series
data with shape space projections. Computer Graphics Forum
30, 3 (2011), 701–710. 15
[Wil67] WILLIAMS L.: The effects of target specification on ob-
jects fixated during visual search. Acta psychologica 27 (1967),
355–415. 7, 8
[WMM∗02] WESTIN C. F., MAIER S. E., MAMATA H.,
NABAVI A., JOLESZ F. A., KIKINIS R.: Processing and visu-
alization for diffusion tensor MRI. Medical Image Analysis 6, 2
(2002), 93–108. 16, 19, 20
[WPL96] WITTENBRINK C. M., PANG A., LODHA S. K.:
Glyphs for visualizing uncertainty in vector fields. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph 2, 3 (1996), 266–279. 20
[You01] YOUSEF M. K.: Assessment of metaphor efficacy in user
interfaces for the elderly: a tentative model for enhancing acces-
sibility. In Proceedings of the 2001 EC/NSF workshop on Uni-
versal accessibility of ubiquitous computing: providing for the
elderly (2001), WUAUC’01, ACM, pp. 120–124. 7
(cid:13)c The Eurographics Association 2013.
