--- PAGE 1 ---
Feature Article
Glyph Visualization:
A Fail-Safe Design Scheme Based
on Quasi-Hamming Distances
Philip A. Legg ■ University of the West of England
Eamonn Maguire ■ CERN European Laboratory for Particle Physics
Simon Walton and Min Chen ■ University of Oxford
I
n many spatial and temporal visualization ap- theory, which has been considered a candidate
plications, glyphs provide an effective means framework for visualization in previous work.1
for encoding multivariate data. Glyph-based In this article, we explore the concept of Ham-
visualizations are ubiquitous in modern life be- ming distance, a well-established measure from
cause they make excellent use of the human ability information theory that underpins the study of
to learn abstract and metaphoric representations, codes to support error detec-
facilitating instantaneous recognition and under- tion and error correction by the
To address the various
standing. However, because glyphs are typically receiver, without the need for
perceptual errors common to
small, they are vulnerable to various perceptual corroboration from the sender.
glyph-based visualizations,
errors. Glyphs are often designed with a high Specifically, we introduce the
degree of similarity to facilitate mapping con- concept of a quasi-Hamming this article introduces the
sistency, semantic interpretation, learning, and distance in the context of glyph concept of a quasi-Hamming
memorization. As Figure 1 shows, as the size of the design. We examine the feasi- distance in the context of
graphs decrease, the glyphs become indistinguish- bility of estimating the quasi- glyph design and examines
able. Similarly, color defects from poor printing or Hamming distance between a the feasibility of estimating
uncalibrated display screens could make it difficult pair of glyphs and the minimal the quasi-Hamming distance
to differentiate between glyphs. Hamming distance for a glyph
between a pair of glyphs
Although many glyph designers attempt to ac- set. This measurement enables
and the minimal Hamming
count for perception and legibility, they may also glyph designers to determine the
distance for a glyph set.
wish to incorporate their own creativity and intu- differentiability between glyphs,
ition as an artist. Thus, a delicate balance exists facilitating design optimization
between the science and the art of effective glyph by maximizing distances between glyphs under
design. This poses some challenging research ques- various design constraints. We demonstrate the
tions for glyph visualization: Is there a theoretical design concept by developing an event visualiza-
framework to encompass various design guide- tion tool that can depict the activities of multiple
lines? Is there a systematic approach to designing users of a file system. Our evaluation shows that
a fail-safe glyph set? This work is a direct attempt the concept of quasi-Hamming distance allows us
to answer the second question, but we also con- to design glyphs that significantly reduce the vul-
nect glyph-based visualization with information nerability of glyph-based visualization. We hope
Published by the IEEE Computer Society 0272-1716/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEE IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 31
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 31 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 2 ---
Feature Article
Size reduction Size reduction Size reduction
Color degeneration (saturation) Color degeneration (luminance) Grayscale degeneration
Figure 1. Different types of quality degeneration applied to glyphs, each of which is encoded using a single
visual channel. When their size, saturation, or luminance change, glyphs can become more difficult to
differentiate. The original image quality is indicated by the rectangular marker on the x axis.
111 Valid codeword 111 transmission accordingly.
■ Automated error correction enables the receiver
to detect an error and deduce what the intended
110 101 011 110 101 011 transmission must have been.
Hamming defined the following principle:
100 010 001 100 010 001
A code of d + 1 minimal Hamming distance
can be used to detect d bits of errors dur-
ing transmission. A code of 2d + 1 minimal
000 Invalid codeword 000
Hamming distance can be used to correct d
(a) (b)
bits of errors during transmission.2
Figure 2. Two 3-bit codes. (a) The first code can detect 1-bit errors, and
(b) the second code can detect 2-bit errors and correct 1-bit errors. For example, given a 3-bit code, as illustrated
in Figure 2, there are eight possible codewords.
that this new concept will encourage designers to We can select a subset of these codewords to con-
consider systematically the need to empower vi- struct a code with its minimal Hamming distance
sualization users to detect and correct potential equal to 2 or 3 bits. Figure 2a shows one such
perception errors. code that has four code words and is of 2 bits
Hamming distance. This code can detect 1-bit
Hamming Distance errors because any change in a valid codeword
In information theory and data communication, by 1 bit would result in an invalid codeword,
a code consists of a finite set of codewords, each of which would lead the receiver to discover the
which is a digital representation of a letter in an error. Figure 2b shows another code with two
alphabet. In the context of binary encoding, Ham- codewords and of 3 bits Hamming distance. It
ming distance, proposed by Richard Hamming in can detect 2-bit errors and correct 1-bit errors.
1950, is a measure of the number of bit positions When a valid codeword (such as 111) is changed
in which two codewords differ.2 Considering all by 1 bit during transmission (such as 110), the
pairs of codewords in a code, the minimal distance receiver can detect such an error and recover the
is referred to as the code’s minimal Hamming intended codeword based on the nearest-neighbor
distance. (In the literature, the word minimal is principle. If a 2-bit error occurred during trans-
often confusingly omitted). In communication, mission, the receiver would be able to detect the
there are two main strategies for handling errors error but could not correct it. Nevertheless, if
that occur during transmission: 2-bit errors are likely to occur, then this should
either be used as only an error-detection code or
■ Automated error detection lets the receiver dis- a code with a longer Hamming distance should
cover if an error has occurred and request a re- be used instead.
32 March/April 2017
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 32 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 3 ---
Quasi-Hamming Distance for Glyph
(a)
Design
A set of glyphs is a code, and each glyph in the
set is a valid codeword. During visualization, there
can be errors in displaying or perceiving a glyph. (b)
If a viewer can detect that a perceived glyph is not
correct, a conscious or unconscious effort can be Figure 3. Examples of error detection and correction in glyph-based
made to fix the error. Conscious effort, which is an visualization. (a) In the first example, the orientation of the glyph on
analogy of error detection and repeated transmis- the left is distorted. A viewer may sense this and consult the legend
sion, may include zooming in for a closer look or for correction. (b) In the second example, a viewer may unconsciously
consulting a legend. Unconscious effort, which is perceive the glyph on the left as a star shape due to Gestalt effects and
an analogy of error correction, can be the result of a priori knowledge about the glyph set, even though the top point of
Gestalt effects (the nearest neighbor)3 or a com- the star is missing because of occlusion.
bined judgment involving multiple visual compo-
nents (redundancy).4 common unit for both distance and error mea-
Figure 3 shows two example glyph sets, each surement. Let us first consider an ordered visual
with eight codewords. Given the two display errors channel, such as brightness or length, as a code
depicted on the left—an arrow glyph is skewed in C. Theoretically, C can have a set of codewords
Figure 3a and a shape glyph is occluded by another c , c , …, c such that the difference between two
1 2 n
shape in Figure 3b—we can detect both errors eas- consecutive codewords is the just-noticeable dif-
ily. The error with the arrow glyph may need some ference (JND) of this visual channel.
conscious effort, whereas the shape error can of- We can define the QHD between each pair of
ten be corrected unconsciously. This suggests that code words c and c as |i – j| bits. If c is mis-
i j i
it is possible to establish a conceptual framework, taken for c , we can call this a d-bit error, where
j
similar to Hamming distance, for error detection d = |i – j|. Now let us extend this concept to a
and correction in glyph-based visualization. less ordered visual channel (hue) or an integrated
However, measuring the distances and errors in channel (color). Theoretically, we can construct a
visual perception is clearly not as simple as mea- code C by uniformly sampling the visual channel’s
suring those represented by binary codewords. space (for example, the CIE Lab color space) while
We thereby propose an approximated conceptual ensuring that every pair of samples differ by at
framework based on the principle of Hamming least the JND of this channel. These codewords, or
distance and call it quasi-Hamming distance (QHD). samples, can be organized into a network, where
The term quasi implies that the distance measure the distance between any two codewords can be
is approximated, as is the quantitative measure of approximated proportionally according to the
perceptual error. JND (JND = 1 bit). Note that the possible percep-
QHD can be considered a kind of measurement tion error rate with a code that maximizes the
of “perceptual distance” between two glyphs. number of codewords based on JND is likely to
QHD offers several benefits: be high. In practice, a glyph set is designed based
only on a small subset of samples in a visual
■ It connects glyph-based visualization to infor- channel or more commonly in the multivariate
mation theory through an important and widely space of several visual channels. Hence, a QHD
used concept (Hamming distance) in computing measure based on JND would be too fine to use in
and communication. practice, although in a longer term, JND can pro-
■ It relates the need for accurate perception of vide an absolute reference measure once we have
glyphs to error detection and correction by the obtained such measures for most visual channels
receiver. in visualization.
■ It facilitates quantitative measures semantically
equivalent to Hamming distance and its math- Measuring QHD
ematical implication. This leads us to the second research question:
Given a glyph set, how can we measure the dis-
The main research questions are therefore as fol- tance between glyphs? We can consider using the
low: Can we establish a measurement unit com- following methods:
mon to both measures? How do we obtain such
measurements? 1. Estimation by expert designers. This practice has
For the first question, we can utilize a bit as the always existed in designing exercises, such as
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 33
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 33 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 4 ---
Feature Article
for traffic signs and icons in user interfaces. To there is not yet a conclusive confirmation
formalize this practice, designers can explicitly about optimal image similarity measures, and
estimate and label the distance between each there are hardly any metrics specially designed
pair of glyphs in a glyph set. Although this ap- for measuring glyph similarities.
proach may be most convenient to the design-
ers, its effectiveness depends on the experience To demonstrate the feasibility of estimating
of the designers involved, and it is rather easy QHD, we conducted two proof-of-concept experi-
to overlook certain types of display and percep- ments based on methods 4 and 5. We considered
tion errors. a task-based evaluation (method 3) as a possible
2. Crush tests. Introduced by Eamonn Maguire approach because the glyph set under consider-
and his colleagues,5 crush tests rescale glyphs ation is a file-activity visualization. However, this
to lower pixel resolutions to assess the pre- additional cognitive load may distort the glyph
served detail. We can simulate different causes similarity assessment. Instead, for the purposes of
of errors, such as those illustrated in Figure 1, this study, method 4 allowed a much more general
and determine at which level of degeneration audience to participate in the study, and method 5
glyphs may become indistinguishable. The cor- let us corroborate the two methods.
responding level of degeneration can be used to We conducted a survey with 20 participants, all
of whom are either employees or students at the
University of Oxford. About half the participants
Quasi-Hamming distance can be had encountered glyph-based visualization pre-
viously. The results of one participant were con-
considered a measurement of “perceptual
sidered an outlier and were not included in the
distance” between two glyphs. statistics. After a brief introduction by one of the
coauthors of this article, we asked the participants
to rate how well they could differentiate 104 pairs
of glyphs, on an integer scale between 0 and 10.
define the QHD. Although this approach yields The 104 stimuli pairs were divided into three
a more consistent QHD estimation, more re- main categories: eight reference pairs, 48 primi-
search would be required to compile a list of tive pairs, and 48 application-specific pairs. The
different causes of errors and define coherent eight reference pairs were designed to define the
levels of degeneration. minimal and maximal QHD in the context of this
3. Task-based evaluation. Similar to method 2, work. In four reference pairs, the two glyphs are
we can simulate different visualization con- extremely difficult to differentiate (minimal dis-
ditions, enlist users to perform their tasks, tance). In the other four pairs, the two glyphs can
measure user performance, and transform be differentiated with undisputable ease (maximal
performance measures to QHD. This approach distance).
is perhaps most semantically meaningful for We divided the primitive pairs into eight groups:
a particular glyph set in a specific application hue, shape, components, connection lines, lu-
context. However, the performance measures minance, size, texture, and orientation. In each
collected may exhibit many confounding ef- group, different pairs feature graphs with differ-
fects, and the specifics of the application may ent perceptual distances, which let us obtain the
mean that only a small number of users are human-centric estimation of the QHD for basic
available for evaluation. visual channels individually. The application pairs
4. User-centric estimation. We may conduct a contain glyphs designed for our application case
survey among human participants about how study, which we will discuss in detail in the “Case
easy or difficult it is to differentiate different Study” section.
glyphs. By removing the task dependency nec- The 96 primitive and application-specific pairs
essary for method 3, more participants can be were mixed together in a randomized order. The
involved in such a survey, yielding a more reli- eight reference pairs were placed at positions 1, 2,
able QHD estimation. 35, 36, 69, 70, 103, and 104 to help the participants
5. Computer-based similarity measures. A variety of regularize their scores and to enable us to check
image similarity measures already exist in the temporal consistency. See the online supplementary
literature.6 In the long term, it is likely that we materials for further details about the questionnaire
will be able to find measures that are statisti- and stimuli grouping (https://extras.computer
cally close to user-centric estimation, although .org/extra/mcg2017020031s1.pdf) and for the full
34 March/April 2017
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 34 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 5 ---
Figure 4. Sample of results for the primitive glyph pairs used in both the user-centric estimation (top) and by computer-based
similarity measure (bottom). Low values indicate pairs that are difficult to differentiate, and high values indicate easy to
differentiate. Examples from groups A–D are highlighted, where group A is hard to differentiate, group B is easy to differentiate,
group C is differentiated by color, and group D is differentiated by shape. The color legend shows the QHD ranges, where red
indicates a low QHD (0 ≤ QHD ≤ 1) and blue indicates a high QHD (4 ≤ QHD ≤ 5).
survey results (https://extras.computer.org/extra/ Table 1. Average QHD results for the primitive glyph
mcg2017020031s2.xlsx). pairs by group.*
As we mentioned earlier, we divided the category Group Average QHD
of reference pairs into two groups. Group A con-
Human Computer
sists of four pairs of very similar glyphs, and group
E (Component) 3.5 3.4
B consists of four pairs of very different glyphs.
D (Shape) 3.4 3.5
We expected that participants would assign low
scores (difficult to differentiate) to those in group J (Orientation) 3.0 1.6
A and high scores (easy to differentiate) to those F (Connection) 2.8 2.4
in group B, respectively. We placed one pair from I (Texture) 2.2 3.3
group A and one from group B at regular intervals.
C (Color) 2.2 1.5
The average scores for the four pairs in group A
H (Size) 2.1 4.2
were 0.0, 0.4, 1.4, and 2.8, respectively. Those for
G (Luminance) 1.2 2.4
group B were 9.3, 9.0, 8.9, and 9.7, respectively.
*These results were obtained from human participants and from a
These results indicate that they statistically served
computer-based algorithmic similarity measure. They are ordered
as references for the minimal and maximum QHD according to the human estimation.
in this survey.
The category of primitive pairs consists of eight
groups (C–J) for estimating QHD in relation to the In our second experiment, we measured the
eight visual channels (C: hue, D: shape, E: compo- similarity between each pair of glyphs using a
nents, F: connection lines, G: luminance, H: size, computer-based metric. To calculate this, we
I: texture, and J: orientation). Figure 4 shows a developed a metric based on weighted invariant
sample of the groups. (Full group details are avail- image moments,6,7 a well-established approach
able in the supplementary material.) Each group in computer vision that is widely used for im-
has six pairs of stimuli, facilitating a pairwise age similarity. The metric incorporates both pixel
comparison of four different codewords for each color and spatial occupancy to assess the differ-
channel. For the hue and luminance channels, af- ence between two images. The former captures
ter choosing the first and fourth codewords, we a variety of feature differences (such as color,
used a perceptually uniform color model (Hunter’s luminance, size, and orientation) and is defined
lab) to determine the second and third codewords as the mean Euclidean distance between all cor-
at 50 and 75 percent distance from the first, re- responding pixels in the two images representing
spectively. The upper part of Figure 4 shows a small the pair of glyphs. The latter captures location-in-
selection of the survey results, where we converted variant features (such as spatial occupancy) and
the [0, 10] score range to a [0, 5] QHD range. We is defined as the difference between the numbers
consider a QHD of less than 2 as potentially risky of pixels with ≤ 80 percent luminance. Both dif-
for error detection, and a QHD of less than 3 as ference measures are first normalized to the [0,
potentially risky for error correction. 1] range and are then scaled to the same QHD
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 35
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 35 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 6 ---
Feature Article
range as the survey (with the same min, mean, in a visualization. Finally, the visualization should
and max) before being combined into a single support collaborative environments by depicting
metric. The lower part of Figure 4 shows the com- activities from different users.
puted similarity measures for the same selection
of stimuli pairs. Designing File-System Event Glyphs
Table 1 shows the average QHD results for both Like the design of most visual representations,
the human-centric study and the computer simi- glyph design needs to achieve a balance among
larity measure by group. With the human par- many factors relating to the data, user, task, and
ticipants, shape, component, and orientation all application. For this application, we consider that
scored a QHD ≥ 3, which suggests they are well the volume of data is high, although it is expected
separable visual channels. Luminance, however, to be filtered in some way, such as for a specific por-
was the only group to score below QHD < 2, sug- tion of the file system, specific file types, or specific
gesting it is not well separable. While some visual user groups. Nevertheless, the glyphs are expected
channels were also scored similarly by the com- to be relatively small and plentiful on a display
puter-based similarity measure (shape, component, screen. The visualization tasks are primarily rou-
and connection), other channels differed from the tine observation and external memorization of the
user feedback (size and orientation). This shows events in a file system. The users are expected to be
that further research needs to be conducted in this regular users who will have the motivation, ability,
area regarding how a computer can understand hu- and time to familiarize themselves with multivari-
man visual perception. ate glyphs, although any metaphoric encoding will
benefit learning and memorizing glyphs.
Case Study: Visualizing File-System Events We considered the QHD concept throughout
The problem of visualizing file systems plays a the design, development, evaluation, and ap-
significant role in the short history of computer- plication of the glyphs that are utilized in our
assisted visualization. In 1991, motivated by the file activity visualization tool. Through iterative
need to visualize a file system’s structure, Brian design and team discussions, our understanding
Johnson and Ben Shneiderman published their and appreciation of the concept improved along
seminal paper on tree maps.8 with this process. As a result of this process, we
Today, file systems are much larger and contain finalized our design for 18 glyphs that represent
many more files; they are also shared by many more the most common events in a file system (see Fig-
users and have many more events. One important ure 5). These events include creation, modifica-
purpose of a file system is to support collaborative tion, deletion, copying, moving, and renaming.
activities, such as sharing files within multipart- The action may be applied to a file, directory,
ner projects and developing software among a team device, shortcut (symbolic link), or metadata.
of programmers. Although there are text-based The designs of these event glyphs evolved in sev-
mechanisms for recording events in relation to a eral stages.
file system or a specific folder, the amount of data
contained in typical log files can easily escalate to Initial Design
the point where it becomes too overwhelming for We first designed a set of glyphs in conjunction
anyone to read on a regular basis. To the best of with the overall visual design of the visualization
our knowledge, there are no effective visualization tool (shown on the right side of Figure 5). This
techniques that allows users of such collaborative allowed us to appreciate how these glyphs may be
environments to observe events effectively. used and to identify the typical display conditions,
In this case study, we designed and developed a such as glyph sizes, density, and available visual
novel glyph-based visualization tool for observing channels. At this stage, we decided that the basic
events in a file system. There were several techni- glyph designs should not feature the hue chan-
cal challenges. First, the file system’s hierarchical nel; we reserved this intuitive and powerful visual
nature needs to be depicted so that the spatial con- channel to depict user- or data-specific variables.
text of where a particular event has occurred can
be identified. Second, the temporal information Expert Estimation
about events needs to be conveyed so that the ac- Four visualization researchers took part in this
tivity ordering can also be observed and reasoned. research, and all had publications in areas of
Third, there are a wide range of activities (such glyph-based visualization. We used our knowl-
as copying and modifying a file) that are typically edge about different visual channels and our
performed that would need to be distinguishable experience in glyph designs to improve on the
36 March/April 2017
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 36 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 7 ---
File operations Glyph Connections Semantics
A
Reference line (no change during this period)
Delete file
Change occurred to the metadata of the leaf file only
New file
Change occurred to content of a leaf file only Modify file metadata
File deletion
File creation B
Modify metadata of a file (dates, owner, access, etc.)
Open file Modify file
Open a file (access to content)
C
Must open
Modify content of a file (write action) then modify Copy file
Move file (deletion then creation)
Copy a file (access then creation)
Create a shortcut (symbolic link) (metadata then creation) Move file
Delete a directory
Create a directory Create shortcut
Modify directory metadata
D
Open a directory New directory
Modify content of a directory, implicitly defined by Modify directory metadata
Must open
events in files, but can be used for summarization then modify
Move directory
Open Modify directory
Copy a directory directory
Create a shortcut (symbolic link) to directory
Move directory
Mount file system
Unmount file system
Figure 5. The 18 glyphs designed to represent different file-system events. Each event is associated with its primary glyph
representation in the second column. In addition, an event may be associated with special signatures in terms of connection
(third column) and semantic ordering (fourth column). The graphs on the right side (A–D) illustrate the initial designs for the
timeline visualization, which depicts file activity using the proposed glyph set with a hierarchical tree representation of the file
system to provide context.
original designs. This is similar to the estimation software, such as by zooming and overlaying a
by expert designers approach (method 1) we dis- translucent shape on top of glyphs.
cussed previously. At this stage, we realized that simulating dif-
In this evaluation, we noticed that although we ferent conditions that would cause glyph quality
agreed on how easy or difficult it was to differen- to degenerate was not a trivial undertaking. In
tiate between pairs of glyphs, we could not easily many ways, this also echoed the multifaceted na-
agree on the reasons why. When we explicitly tried ture and complexity in estimating QHD that we
to determine the QHD between a pair of glyphs, mentioned earlier.
we were often influenced by different features,
such as component shapes, convexity, aspect ratio, Human-Centric Estimation
and curvature. This experience led us to further As we discussed earlier, we conducted a survey to
appreciate the multifaceted complexity in estimat- gain a better understanding about QHD in the
ing QHD. Many of the glyph designs in Figure 5 context of individual visual channels. This also
were stabilized at this stage. allowed us to evaluate the set of proposed event
glyphs. We considered 20 glyph designs, for which
Crush Tests there were 190 pairwise comparisons. We selected
We applied crush tests to all glyphs designed dur- 48 pairs that we considered to be “more risky” than
ing the case study (method 2). In several cases, other pairs in terms of differentiability. Figure 6
we carried out systematic testing by applying con- shows three example questions from the ques-
sistent zooming factors to all glyphs. More often, tionnaire, in which we asked users how difficult
when we were considering individual glyphs, we or easy it is to differentiate these pairs of glyphs.
carried out ad hoc crush tests using our drawing In this particular example, the first two pairs are
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 37
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 37 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 8 ---
Feature Article
Figure 6. Three
examples from
the survey As Figure 5 shows, we utilized some similar de-
questionnaire. signs for files and directories to assist in learning
Participants and memorization. Meanwhile, we also considered
were asked, how they may be connected. The three types of
“How difficult connection lines are shown on the top of Figure 5,
or easy is it to and the different orientations shown in the third
differentiate column may potentially add additional features
between for differentiating glyphs. For example, all lines
these pairs of connecting to a deletion glyph will always come
glyphs?” There from the left, and all lines connecting to a creation
were a total of glyph will always extend to the right. All lines con-
104 questions, necting to a copy or move glyph will suggest a spa-
based on tial shift vertically. In addition, semantic ordering,
68 different such as to open and read a file, can also increase
glyphs. the QHD, as Figure 5 illustrates.
Evaluating Event Glyphs
As part of the study we described earlier, we eval-
uated the glyphs in Figure 5 based on the QHD
obtained from a human-centric survey and using
from our proposed glyph set (groups S and R) and computer-based similarity measures. This allowed
the third example is a primitive pair for measur- for a comparative analysis against the reference
ing orientation (group J). The full questionnaire is pairs and primitive glyph sets. For our glyph set,
available in the supplementary material. only the potentially risky pairs were evaluated.
In the survey, we found that only one pair scored The human-centric estimation provided us with
below 2 bits in terms of QHD. The final designs the most meaningful insight about the glyphs’
of the glyphs did not include this pair. The details quality. The 104 pairs of glyphs evaluated by par-
of this evaluation are provided in the “Evaluating ticipants received an average QHD of 2.9 bits. The
Event Glyphs” section. average QHD for the reference pairs (groups A and
B) is 2.7 bits. The average for the primitive pairs
Computer-Based Similarity Measures (groups C to J) is 2.6 bits. For our proposed glyph
We used the same similarity metric we mentioned set, the average QHD for the potentially risky pairs
earlier to measure the QHD of the 48 pairs that (groups O to Z) is 3.2 bits, suggesting that these
were potentially risky. We found that they all glyphs are well differentiable.
passed this QHD test. The details of this evalu- Almost all our glyph pairs for file-system visu-
ation are also provided in the “Evaluating Event alization have a QHD above 2 bits. Only one pair
Glyphs” section. received QHD = 1.5 bits, and it was not used in
the final design. The upper part of Figure 7 shows
Deployment in Software a subset of the survey results. The computer-based
In addition to this design effort, we incorporated metric also measured our glyph pairs favorably.
the glyph set into the visualization tool and used As we mentioned previously, the average QHD es-
the tool to visualize events in a Dropbox folder. timated by the metric is normalized to have the
This helped us gain direct experience with these same min, mean, and max as the human-centric
glyphs and learn how they might be viewed and estimation. The complete set of 104 glyph pairs
interpreted in practical applications. The details of have an average QHD of 2.9 bits. The average
this deployment are discussed in the “Visualizing QHD for the reference pairs is 2.6 bits. The aver-
Dropbox Activity Logs” section. age for the primitive pairs is 2.7 bits. The average
for the potentially risky pairs in our glyph set is
Further Considerations 3.1 bits, again suggesting that the proposed set of
Differentiability is only one aspect of glyph de- glyphs are well differentiated. The lowest QHD for
sign. We have to consider other aspects such as our potentially risks glyph pairs is 2.1 bits.
how easy it is to learn and remember glyphs, how The evaluation also revealed some interesting
glyphs may be connected, and how they may be phenomena. The additional features added to the
ordered if the corresponding events happened to directory glyphs reduced the QHD among the
the same file or directory. directory glyphs. For example, when comparing
38 March/April 2017
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 38 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 9 ---
Related Work in Glyph Visualization
T he work described in this article covers the broad the such as temperature, pressure, wind direction, and wind
definition of glyphs provided by Rita Borgo and her speed.9 And Johannes Fuchs and his colleagues conducted
colleagues.1 We thus consider a glyph an evaluation study that addressed temporal glyph de-
signs for small multiple displays.10
a small visual object that can be used independently
and constructively to depict attributes of a data
record or the composition of a set of data records. References
Each glyph can be placed independently from oth- 1. R. Borgo et al. “Glyph-Based Visualization: Foundations,
ers, while in some cases, glyphs can be spatially Design Guidelines, Techniques and Applications,”
connected to convey the topological relationships Eurographics State of the Art Reports, May 2013, pp. 39–63.
between data records or geometric continuity of the 2. M.O. Ward, “A Taxonomy of Glyph Placement Strategies for
underlying data space. Glyphs are a type of visual Multidimensional Data Visualization,” Information Visualization,
sign that can make use of visual features of other vol. 1, nos. 3–4, 2002, pp. 194–210.
types of signs such as icons, indices, and symbols. 3. M.O. Ward, Multivariate Data Glyphs: Principles and Practice,
Springer, 2008.
Matthew Ward provided a technical framework for 4. A.E. Lie, J. Kehrer, and H. Hauser, “Critical Design and
glyph-based visualization that covers aspects of visual Realization Aspects of Glyph-Based 3D Data Visualization,” Proc.
mapping and layout methods as well as addresses impor- 25th Spring Conf. Computer Graphics (SCCG), 2009, pp. 19–26.
tant issues such as bias in mapping and interpretation.2,3 5. P.A. Legg et al., “MatchPad: Interactive Glyph-Based
The state-of-the-art report on glyph-based visualization by Visualization for Real-Time Sports Performance Analysis,”
Borgo and her colleagues also compiles many of the design Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 31, no. 3, 2012, pp. 1255–1264.
guidelines and techniques that have been utilized in the 6. T. Kapler and W. Wright, “GeoTime Information Visualization,”
field.1 Researchers have discussed various design consider- Proc. IEEE Information Visualization, 2004, pp. 25–32.
ations for glyph-based visualization for 3D data, including 7. J. Pearlman and P. Rheingans, “Visualizing Network Security
data mapping, glyph instantiation, and rendering.4 Events Using Compound Glyphs from a Service-Oriented
Glyphs have also been used in a variety of applications. Perspective,” Proc. Workshop on Visualization for Computer
For example, Philip Legg and his colleagues proposed Security (VizSEC 2007), 2008, pp. 131–146.
MatchPad for analyzing sports event data using glyph- 8. M. Suntinger et al., “The Event Tunnel: Interactive Visualization
based visualization.5 Thomas Kapler and William Wright of Complex Event Streams for Business Process Pattern
proposed GeoTime for displaying military events in a com- Analysis,” Proc. IEEE Pacific Visualization, 2008, pp. 111–118.
bined temporal and geospatial visualization.6 J. Pearlman 9. C. Ware and M.D. Plumlee, “Designing a Better Weather
and P. Rheingans used glyphs to visualize network security Display,” Information Visualization, vol. 12, 3–4, 2013, pp.
events.7 Martin Suntinger and his colleagues used glyph- 221–239.
based event visualization to create an event tunnel for 10. J. Fuchs et al., “Evaluation of Alternative Glyph Designs
business analysis and incident exploration.8 Colin Ware for Time Series Data in a Small Multiple Setting,” Proc.
and Matthew Plumlee investigated the use of glyph- Conf. Human Factors in Computer Systems (CHI), 2013, pp.
based visualization for encoding multivariate weather data 3237–3246.
groups O and Q, where the glyphs for creation, between groups O and Q and between groups T
modify metadata, and modify content were com- and V, which given the similar design is under-
pared within the context of files (group O) and standable. This suggests that further research is
directories (group Q), the human-centric estima- necessary to enrich the existing findings about
tion shows a noticeable difference. The average how the distance functions for integrated and
QHD for group O (files) is 3.4 bits and that for separable visual channels may affect perception.5
group Q (directories) is 2.6 bits. Yet, the glyphs
for directories are similar to those of files, with Visualizing Dropbox Activity Log
the addition of the rectangle to the right of the To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed
circular region. glyph set, we developed an interactive tool for visu-
Similarly, for groups T and V, where move, copy, alizing file event log data. The system consists of a
and shortcut glyphs were compared, the average Python backend for processing logs from file storage
QHD for group T (files) is 3.3 bits and for group V services such as Dropbox and Git, and a web-based
(directories) is 2.8 bits. Meanwhile, the computer- frontend that provides the user interface. The fron-
based similarity measures suggest little difference tend was created with a combination of HTML5,
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 39
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 39 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 10 ---
Feature Article
Figure 7. Sample of results for the file visualization glyph pairs used in both the user-centric estimation (top) and computer-based
similarity measure (bottom). Low values indicate difficult to differentiate, and high values indicate easy to differentiate. The color
legend shows the QHD ranges, where red indicates a low QHD (0 ≤ QHD ≤ 1) and blue a high QHD (4 ≤ QHD ≤ 5).
Figure 8. Glyph-based visualization displaying events in a Dropbox activity log. The vertical bars are an
abstract representation of a directory tree, and the timeline flows from left to right. At point A, a number of
users have modified the same file. The popup gives more details about the modifications, who made them,
and when to allow for provenance tracking. Point B shows another interesting case where user X (orange)
created a file; then user Y made a copy of this file, opened it, and modified it. User X then deleted the original
file, but the copy user Y modified still exists elsewhere.
CSS, and JavaScript (utilizing Raphael.js for the ■ displaying detailed view when a mouse hov-
visualization element and jQuery for control of ers over a glyph.
popup events). In addition to glyph-based visualiza-
tion, the system supports a variety of interactions: Figure 8 shows an excerpt of the file-system visu-
alization, depicting events from a Dropbox activity
■ filtering different types of file-system events, log. Because Dropbox supports file-sharing capabili-
■ filtering different users, ties, it is desirable for users to visualize events in
■ selecting a specific directory as a subtree, a shared folder, for instance, to see which file was
■ selecting different time periods, created or modified recently and by whom. Although
■ zooming and scrolling on the directory axis and the service does provide a text-based activity log that
timeline, and users can access, it is time-consuming and tedious
40 March/April 2017
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 40 2/14/17 3:31 PM

--- PAGE 11 ---
to read a long list of events. Glyph-based visualiza- 4. P. Rheingans and C. Landreth, “Perceptual Principles
tion gives users an easy overview of the events in a for Effective Visualizations,” Perceptual Issues in
shared folder. The visualization in Figure 8 makes Visualization, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 59–74.
use of the glyph set shown in Figure 5, with color 5. E. Maguire et al., “Taxonomy-Based Glyph Design with
used to depict different users. This example includes a Case Study on Visualizing Workflows of Biological
three different users (blue, orange, and green) who Experiments,” IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer
have accessed the system during this time. Graphics, vol. 18, no. 12, 2012, pp. 2603–2612.
The glyphs are shown in conjunction with the 6. C. Zitova and J. Flusser, “Image Registration
file system hierarchy, which is represented at each Methods: A Survey,” Image and Vision Computing,
of the three time intervals by the gray vertical bars. vol. 21, no. 11, 2003, pp. 977–1000.
We can see that some files were accessed by all 7. M.-K. Hu, “Visual Pattern Recognition by Moment
three users, such as the top line between the first Invariants,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, IT-8,
and second time steps. Here, the orange user cre- 1962, pp. 179-187.
ated a file and then opened and modified it. Later, 8. B. Johnson and B. Shneiderman, “Tree-Maps: A Space-
the blue user modified the file’s metadata (possi- Filling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical
bly renaming it or changing its access date). Af- Information Structures,” Proc. IEEE Visualization,
terward, the green user opened and modified the 1991, pp. 284–291.
file. By hovering over each glyph with the mouse,
the user can display a popup window that pro- Philip A. Legg is a senior lecturer in computer science at the
vides further detail about the activities, including University of the West of England. His research interests in-
the sequence of file events and the associated file clude visualization, machine learning, and human-computer
size. This enables collaborative colleagues to easily interaction. Legg has a PhD in computer science from Cardiff
understand ongoing actions, reducing the need to University. Contact him at phil.legg@uwe.ac.uk.
update other users manually.
Eamonn Maguire is a research scientist at the CERN Eu-
ropean Laboratory of Particle Physics. His research interests
W
e consider this to be the first step toward include visualization and machine learning. Maguire has a
establishing a collection of mathematical DPhil in computer science from the University of Oxford.
and cognitive theories, experimental findings and Contact him at eamonnmaguire@gmail.com.
statistics, design techniques, and computational
metrics for guiding and aiding glyph designs. This Simon Walton is a research associate in the e-Research
work highlights a number of gaps where further Center at the University of Oxford. His research interests
research is needed. For example, it would be highly include visualization and computer graphics. Walton has a
desirable to understand the relationship between PhD in computer science from Swansea University. Contact
the JND measures of various visual channels and him at simon.walton@oerc.ox.ac.uk.
differentiability of glyphs encoded using such vi-
sual channels. It will also be beneficial to corre- Min Chen is a professor of scientific visualization in the
late existing findings about error detection and e-Research Center at the University of Oxford. His research
correction with QHD measures.7 In the future, to interests include visualization, computer graphics, and hu-
further aid glyph design processes, it will be nec- man-computer interaction. Chen has a PhD in computer-
essary to develop computer-based similarity mea- aided engineering design from Swansea University. Contact
sures that are statistically closer to (or even better him at min.chen@oerc.ox.ac.uk.
than) human-centric estimation.
References
1. M. Chen and H. Jänicke, “An Information-
Theoretic Framework for Visualization,” IEEE Trans.
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 16, no. 3,
2010, pp. 1206-1215.
2. R.W. Hamming, “Error Detecting and Error
Correcting Codes,” Bell System Technical J., vol. 29,
no. 2, 1950, pp. 147–160. Read your subscriptions through
3. M. Chen et al., “Visual Multiplexing,” Computer the myCS publications portal at
http://mycs.computer.org.
Graphics Forum, vol. 33, no. 3, 2014, pp. 241–250.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 41
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 06:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
g2leg.indd 41 2/14/17 3:31 PM
