--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012 2603
Taxonomy-Based Glyph Design—with a Case Study on Visualizing
Workflows of Biological Experiments
Eamonn Maguire, Philippe Rocca-Serra, Susanna-Assunta Sansone, Jim Davies, and Min Chen
mRNA extraction NZ_0hrs_Sa b m io p ti l n e_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_0hrs_Sample_1_Labeled hybridization NZ_0hrs_Sample_1_Labeled_Hyb1 scanning NZ_0hrs_Sample_1_Labeled_Hyb1_Scan1
mRNA extraction NZ_1hrs_Drug b _ i S o a ti m n ple_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_1hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_1hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb3 scanning NZ_1hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb3_Scan3
mRNA extraction NZ_2hrs_Drug b _ i S o a ti m n ple_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_2hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_2hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb7 scanning NZ_2hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb7_Scan7
Saccharomyces cerevisiae FY1679 growth NZ_0hrs_Grow_1 mRNA extraction NZ_4hrs_Drug b _ i S o a ti m n ple_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_4hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_4hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb11 scanning NZ_4hrs_Drug_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb11_Scan11
mRNA extraction NZ_2hrs_Vehicl b e i _ o S ti a n mple_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_2hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_2hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb9 scanning NZ_2hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb9_Scan9
mRNA extraction NZ_4hrs_Vehicl b e i _ o S ti a n mple_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb13 scanning NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb13_Scan13
mRNA extraction NZ_4hrs_ b V i e o h t i i c n le_Sample_1_Extract biotin labeling NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled hybridization NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb5 scanning NZ_4hrs_Vehicle_Sample_1_Extract_Labeled_Hyb5_Scan5
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648549.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648567.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648585.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648603.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648639.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648657.txt feature extraction
E-MAXD-4-processed-data-1342566476.txt data processing E-MAXD-4-raw-data-426648621.txt feature extraction
Fig. 1. a) Workflow as rendered currently using toolkits such as GraphViz. b) We propose to replace the textual labels with glyphs,
while allowing interactive access to detailed descriptions. This makes it easy to gain an overview, search components and compare
workflows. The screenshot shows a prototype developed within ISAcreator, a system for capturing biological experiment metadata.
Abstract—Glyph-based visualization can offer elegant and concise presentation of multivariate information while enhancing speed
and ease in visual search experienced by users. As with icon designs, glyphs are usually created based on the designers’ experience
and intuition, often in a spontaneous manner. Such a process does not scale well with the requirements of applications where a large
number of concepts are to be encoded using glyphs. To alleviate such limitations, we propose a new systematic process for glyph
design by exploring the parallel between the hierarchy of concept categorization and the ordering of discriminative capacity of visual
channels. We examine the feasibility of this approach in an application where there is a pressing need for an efficient and effective
means to visualize workflows of biological experiments. By processing thousands of workflow records in a public archive of biological
experiments, we demonstrate that a cost-effective glyph design can be obtained by following a process of formulating a taxonomy
with the aid of computation, identifying visual channels hierarchically, and defining application-specific abstraction and metaphors.
Index Terms—Glyph-based techniques, taxonomies, design methodologies, bioinformatics visualization.
1 INTRODUCTION Most accepted designs have undergone an enduring process of evolu-
tion, refinement and standardization. One could not and should not
Glyph-based visualization is a class of visual representations where a
remove the necessity for such processes in glyph design. Meanwhile,
collection of small visual objects (referred to as glyphs) are used to
the design process for a glyph set usually relies on an assortment of
encode different attribute dimensions of an input data space. A good
creativity, artistic skill, domain knowledge, intuition about users, and
glyph design can enable users to conduct visual search more efficiently
sometimes personal preference. While most of these qualities are ab-
during interactive visualization, and facilitate effective learning, mem-
solutely helpful and some are inevitable, it is highly desirable to intro-
orizing and using the visual encoding scheme. A less effective visual
duce “systematicism” and objectivity into the design process.
design may suffer from various shortcomings such as being percep-
tually confusing, semantically ambiguous, difficult to learn and re- To demonstrate our approach, we elected the field of experimental
member, or unable to accommodate low-resolution display devices. biology as a test bed for developing a systematic methodology to cre-
ate a glyph-based visual mapping for visualizing experimental design
and experimental processes. While experimental design is at the heart
of biological data evidence gathering, representation of such informa-
Eamonn Maguire is with Oxford e-Research Centre and Department of
• tion is confined to either verbose description or ineffective represen-
Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK. E-mail:
tations. This claim is backed by a survey of public biodata repos-
eamonn.maguire@st-annes.ox.ac.uk.
itories, devised to ensure data perennity, scientific scrutiny and re-
Philippe Rocca-Serra, Susanna-Assunta Sansone and Min Chen are with
• producibility. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), workflows are traditionally
Oxford e-Research Centre, University of Oxford, UK. E-mail: philippe.
{ drawn as text-based diagrams. Text labels are indices of concepts, and
rocca-serra,susanna-assunta.sansone,min.chen @oerc.ox.ac.uk.
} usually they do not encode multivariate information directly. Text-
Jim Davies is with Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
• labeled boxes are costly in terms of display space usage as well as
UK. E-mail: jim.davies@cs.ox.ac.uk.
time required for visual search since parsing and interpretation of text
Manuscript received 31 March 2012; accepted 1 August 2012; posted online is a slow post-attentive process [59]. They are particularly ineffective
14 October 2012; mailed on 5 October 2012.
when one needs to compare between different workflows or to identify
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
unusual or missing components in a workflow.
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.
Therefore, exploring an alternative in the form of glyph based rep-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1077-2626/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Published by the IEEE Computer Society

--- PAGE 2 ---
2604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012
resentations, which are at the core of many successful schematic dia- representing and searching DNA sequences and for building genetic
grams in the history of sciences, engineering and business manage- constructs from DNA sequences, facilitating the use of conventional
ment, offers a potentially more effective means for depicting these link diagrams. Both systems rely heavily on text labels. In handling
workflows. This presents us with an interesting case study where other a large collection of workflows, they exhibit a few shortcomings, such
types of design approaches would not be appropriate, especially in as inefficiency in using display space and ineffectiveness in supporting
dealing with several hundreds of conceptual names. some visualization tasks, such as comparisons and novelty or anoma-
It is important to note that domain experts are in general more will- lies detection in workflows.
ing and able to learn and memorize an encoding scheme in order to im- In the literature, several authors encouraged glyph designers to con-
prove the accuracy and efficiency of routine tasks. At the same time, it sider visual perception when constructing glyphs [58, 23]. Others
is also necessary for an encoding scheme to facilitate effective learning examined the design space of icons, which normally encode less in-
and remembering through appropriate abstraction and metaphors. formation than glyphs (e.g., [21, 29]). There were perceptual studies
Motivated by this case study, we made an observation that when showing the merits of icons over text labels (e.g., [34, 41]), as well
a large number of concepts (or taxa) are organized into a taxonomic as those showing the contrary (e.g., [60]). Building on such discus-
tree, the hierarchy typically represents an ordering of different cat- sions, this work aims to address a methodological need for a system-
egorization schemes. The schemes that are higher-up in the taxon- atic approach to glyph design for applications where large collections
omy (closer to the root) are usually considered to be more important, of concepts need to be visually encoded using glyphs.
which reflect their conceptual coverage, frequency of usage, domain-
specific convention, and some other measurable factors. In terms of 2.2 Workflow Visualization
visual encoding, higher up schemes should ideally be mapped to vi- The need for workflow visualization is pervasive across many different
sual channels that have more discriminative capacity. Hence, we can domains. For example, in business and management the Gantt chart is
explore the parallel between the taxonomic hierarchy and the order- a form of text based workflow visualization, while BPMN (Business
ing of visual channels based on discriminative capacity to formulate a Process Model and Notation) and EPC (Event-driven Process Chain)
systematic and relatively objective process for designing a glyph set. make use of icons to enrich text labels. In engineering disciplines, var-
This approach addresses one of the most common criticisms of data ious schematic diagrams, such as UML (Unified Modeling Language),
glyphs: the data to visual attribute mapping bias [58]. Given a large Petri-net and circuit diagrams, are used to convey data flow and pro-
data repository that encompasses many concepts, our design process is cess interaction.
composed of four major steps: (i) gathering and processing raw meta- In this work, we consider workflows used to describe biological
data for obtaining a set of taxa (names); (ii) formulating a taxonomy experiments. This class of workflow visualization renders the pro-
based on a set of categorization schemes (Section 4); (iii) carrying cesses enacted on biological materials in an experiment (e.g., removal
out visual design, which includes the sub-process of determining the of blood sample from patient). There has been little effort to develop
ordering of visual channels, proposing optional visual mappings, and tools that address the domain-specific needs. Scientists usually use
identifying metaphoric abstractions and associations (Section 5); and generic text-based graph drawing tools such as GraphViz [3].
(iv) implementing a glyph-based visualization system, in our case, for One related aspect is pathway visualization, which is concerned
depicting workflows of biological experiments (Section 6). with the rendering of cellular biological processes. An array of path-
Similar to most design processes, it is helpful to conduct all stages way visualization tools have been developed, some of which incorpo-
in a progressive and iterative manner. As glyph-based visualization is rate glyphs. For example, VANTED [22] overlays glyphs representing
normally deployed in a specific application domain, it is important to gene expression, enzyme and metabolite profile data on top of path-
involve domain experts at every stage of the design process. During way diagrams from KEGG [37]. GENeVis [9], which also employs
this work, we met with domain specialists on a weekly basis. glyphs to represent multivariate data, is a comprehensive visualization
toolkit for exploration of pathways in conjunction with temporal data.
2 RELATED WORK GenoCAD has at its core a workflow generation system and relies on
In this section, we give a brief overview of two most relevant areas their glyph library for rendering of the different biological processes
in visualization, glyph-based visualization and workflow visualiza- within a cell. SBGN-ED [14], is an add-on for the VANTED software
tion. The remainder background information includes the biological and performs pathway creation using the aforementioned SBGN [28]
data management, perceptual guidance, and categorization algorithms, visual language.
which will be described in the following sections where the relevant
technical details are discussed. 3 MOTIVATION AND OVERVIEW
The advent of massively parallel techniques such as DNA microar-
2.1 Glyph-based Visualization
ray, mass-spectrometry based proteomics and metabolomics and next
There are many examples of glyph usage in the literature spanning generation sequencing enables molecular biologists to collect, process
many disciplines, especially in conjunction with many schematic di- and manipulate biological signals on a new scale. Big data in biology
agrams. Bertin considered a range of simple glyphs in the context of is a reality. There has been serious effort in biology to ensure qual-
geo-information visualization [7]. Ward surveyed the use of glyphs ity of experimental records by providing data archiving infrastructure
in visualization, and discussed a number of bias issues, design ap- and defining standards for adequate annotation and sufficient details
proaches, and layout options [58]. Ropinksi et al. conducted a survey for recapitulation of results. A number of molecular biology signature
on glyph-based techniques in medical visualizations [48]. In visual- databases have been or are being established to cover the main molec-
ization, a number of interesting glyph designs have been presented ular dimensions: transcript, protein and metabolites. The captured
with noticeable impact on a large range of applications (e.g., medicine metadata mostly revolves around a similar configuration where sets of
[25], software [13], text [47], and scientific computation [62]). Fur- samples corresponding to different conditions are processed, measure-
thermore, Ribarsky et al. developed an editing system, Glyphmaker ments produced and analysis performed, delivering data that needs to
[45], to assist the process of designing glyphs. Post et al. proposed be handled and interpreted. While the availability of such metadata
a language, Icon Modeling Language, for creating glyphs and glyph- facilitates comparison across datasets and enables meta-analysis, pro-
style contours [42]. viding means to serve an overview of experimental design can assist
There have been some recent efforts to use glyph-based visualiza- analysts and data managers alike, from data selection according to rel-
tion in biological sciences. One noticeable attempt is the Systems Bi- evancy, to error detection such as imbalances, irregularities or incon-
ology Graphical Notation (SBGN) [28]. The design of SBGN makes sistencies in records.
use of the notional representations of UML with some modifications to Task Analysis. In the context of meta-databases for experimental
describe the biological entities and their interactions within a biolog- records, there are two main groups of users. The majority of users are
ical system. GenoCAD [11] provides a grammar-based language for those who create data for their biological experiments or retrieve data
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
MAGUIRE ET AL: TAXONOMY-BASED GLYPH DESIGN — WITH A CASE STUDY ON VISUALIZING WORKFLOWS OF… 2605
ated a taxonomic tree by recursively selecting the best categorization
Bi r o e l p o o g s ic it a o l r d ie a s ta Da P t r a o C c a e p ss t i u n r g e & F T o a r x m o u n l o a m tin y g M V a i p su p a in l g A M A b s s e s t t o r a a c p c ia h ti t o o io r n i n c & G s ly e p t h Im G vi l p s y u l p e a h m li - z b e a a n t s i t o e in n d g s o c f h t e h m e e ta b x a o s n e o d m o y n b th y e a q ll u o a w li i t n y g m d e o a m su a r i e n s. ex W pe e rt fi s n ( a 2 liz c e o d -a t u h t e ho o r r s g ) a t n o iz m at a io k n e
Glyph design adjustments according to domain-specific conventions. All leaf nodes
of the resulting taxonomy tree are names extracted from the workflow
metadata. All non-leaf nodes represent a categorization scheme.
Fig. 2. A systematic process for creating glyph based representations.
Glyph Design. First, we established an ordering of commonly-
used visual channels based on the literature focused on perception and
relevant to their scientific interests. Their tasks include: (a) entering
visualization (see Section 5). This allows us to systematically compare
and editing their own experimental records; (b) transforming workflow
the order of categorization schemes in the taxonomy with the order of
records to schematic diagrams for comparison, external memorization,
different visual channels. Ideally, schemes at the upper level of the
publication and education; (c) uploading and downloading datasets;
tree can be mapped to visual channels which are more prominent to
(d) querying and searching for relevant experiments; (e) understanding
our visual system.
workflows of existing experimental designs; (f) identifying similarity
We then proceeded to the glyph design process involving two inter-
and difference between workflows for a common task; (g) understand
twined sub-processes for visual mapping and metaphoric abstrac-
pooling events and sample relations (derivation).
tion and association. We proposed various options of visual chan-
The second group of users are curators who manage data archives.
nels for each categorization scheme featured in the taxonomic tree.
As biology or bioinformatics scientists themselves, they perform the
We considered the merits of these visual channels and identify po-
above-mentioned tasks (d)-(g) frequently, and (b)-(c) occasionally. In
tential conflicts with the visual channels that have been assigned to
addition, they also carry tasks for: (h) checking syntactic correctness
other schemes. With the direct help from domain experts, we tried to
of submitted workflows; (i) checking semantic correctness of submit-
identify a metaphoric abstraction or association for each design option
ted workflows which usually involves reading the associated publica-
proposed. We evaluated and recorded the intuitiveness and suitability
tions then comparing the submitted workflows with those described in
of the abstraction and metaphor association.
the publications; (j) interacting with authors of submitted workflows
Informed by the results the two sub-processes, we finalized a glyph
to clarify any inconsistency and misunderstanding; (k) making appro-
set by selecting a design option for each scheme, while maintain-
priate corrections in submitted records where necessary; (l) augment-
ing the order of discriminative capacity of visual channels, minimiz-
ing with appropriate annotation based on additional information found
ing conflicts between different channels, and maximizing the use of
in the associated publications; (m) providing authors with submission
metaphoric abstraction and association.
feedback. (n) forming an up-to-date overview about the experiments
Implementation of Glyph-based Visualization. We then inte-
in the data archives, and maintaining an insight about the provenance
grated the glyph set with a layout algorithm to form a prototype sys-
of the archives; (n) analyzing the grouping, replication, distribution
tem for workflow visualization (see Section 6). For demonstration
and trend of experiments; (o) analyzing ambiguities, errors and un-
purposes, we tested the workflow visualization in conjunction with
certainty in experimental recording, and identifying the need to enrich
ISAcreator, a popular domain agnostic biological experiment meta-
and refine the relevant standards for ontology, labelling and annota-
data capture tool.
tion. (p) providing tools to assist users in creating meta-data from raw
data.
4 TAXONOMY GENERATION
It is not difficult to observe that effective workflow visualization can
significantly improve users’ capability in performing tasks b, e, f, g, h, Given a large collection of concepts, we should ideally make use of a
i, j, l, n, o and p. standard taxonomy, where non-leaf nodes represent different catego-
While it is necessary to evolve a glyph-based design for workflow rization schemes and each scheme provides subclasses that lead to dif-
visualization over a period, it is also important not to make the first ferent sub-trees. In many circumstances, however, there is no agreed
step in an ad hoc manner. Such a process does not scale well with taxonomic tree as establishing a standard categorization requires non-
the requirements of the application concerned where a large number trivial scientific effort that often spans over a few decades.
of concepts are to be encoded using glyphs. We thus adopt a new sys- The algorithm described below is not intended to establish a
tematic process for glyph design by exploring the parallel between the semantic-rich taxonomic tree for classifying concepts. It is designed
hierarchy of concept categorization and the ordering of discriminative purely for addressing the needs for ordering various categorization
capacity of visual channels. Fig. 2 depicts this process. schemes (when there is no such an agreed order) to aid glyph design,
Data Capture and Processing. We first retrieved workflow and for devising a useful tree data structure in implementing the map-
metadata from a biological repository (content of the ArrayExpress ping between concepts and glyphs in workflow visualization.
archive), through use of a multi-threaded harvesting operation. All ex- Hence, the criteria used for structuring the tree are based on usage
perimental workflows were then converted using a MAGE-Tab to ISA- of the concepts and the structural quality of the tree to be constructed.
Tab converter, the latter format being more general than the former and Taxonomy is a long standing concept that can be traced back to
can be used to carry metadata payloads for many types of experiments, 3000BC [32]. Automatic taxonomy generation has been an active field
making the data processing program more “future-proof”. in computer science and computational biology with existing work
From the 21,000 ISA-Tab files, we extracted all names of protocols largely focusing on clustering algorithms (e.g., [27]). Many such al-
(processes) and biological materials, chemical materials, devices and gorithms assume the availability of similarity measures for ordering
data used in annotation. We also computed the occurrence of each entities rather than relying on the existence of individual categoriza-
material and process found in the entire set of ISA-Tab files, which tion schemes. In these algorithms, there is usually no attempt towards
have been used as one of the metrics in the next stage (see Section 5 application of a metric for creating meaningful non-leaf nodes in the
for details). This step results in 61 process names and 3492 names resulting tree. In this work, it is essential to keep each categorization
of inputs and outputs (e.g., biological and chemical materials, device scheme as a non-leaf node unless it is redundant.
measurements and data).
4.1 Ordering Classification Schemes
Taxonomy Formulation. Since a taxonomy for such a large col-
lection of terms is absent, we, for starters, established a set of cat- Let X = x 1 , x 2 , . . ., xn be a set of concepts to be classified. In our
{ }
egorization schemes with the help of domain experts. For example, application, this is the set of all valid names of biological processes
one of the schemes for categorizing processes may be based on dif- and IOs (inputs and outputs) in the database. Each concept xi is asso-
ferent biological inputs to a process (e.g., molecule, cell, organism, ciated with a scalar value, µi [0, 1], indicating its frequency of usage
∈
etc.). Another scheme may be based on processing methods (e.g., per- in relation to the total occurrence of all concepts in the database. There
turbation, combination, etc.). We computed the quality measures of are a number of categorization schemes, S = S 1 , S 2 , . . ., Sm . Each
{ }
each scheme based a set of generic metrics (see Section 4) then cre- scheme, S divides concepts into several classes, ck, ck, . . ., ck . The
k 1 2 lk
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
2606 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012
relationship between the concept set X and different classification 10 in this work. We introduce the following metric to measure the
schemes can thus be represented by a Boolean matrix, A, where each discriminative capacity of a scheme:
element α[i, j, k] = 1 if concept xi belongs to the jth class of scheme
S
k
; otherwise α[i, j, k] = 0. In the context of feature-based categoriza- 0 ηk < 2
t u i i t n o y, d n e , w r o e S n k a e s a c s s u an m a e a p l a s t r h o t a ic v t u i t e l h a w e r c t e y l a a p c s e h se o s s f ch u th e n i m d s e e f r e S a th k tu e a r s e sa . a m W f e e i a t S h t k u o r u a e t r , e l a o d n s i d i s n j e g o a i g n ch e t. n c e I l r t a a s i l s s - M 4 (S k ) =   η η 1 $ $ − η η $ k+2 η 2 k ≤ > η η k $ ≤ η$ (4)
also possible that a concept does not possess the kth feature, and hence Although the above four metrics have been normalized to ensure
does not belong to any class under S k . their functional values within the [0, 1] domain, the distribution of the
Given the above categorical information about the concept set X , values for different schemes can still be rather application-specific and
one can choose a categorization scheme S k S , which will divide X may vary substantially between different metrics. This may lead to
∈
into a number of disjoint subsets corresponding to classes ck 1 , ck 2 , . . ., ck lk inconsistency in combining these metrics.
and ck. The subset ck contains those concepts which S is unable We thus provide an optional linearization filter for these metrics by
0 0 k
to classify. The partitioning process can be repeated recursively by mapping the values obtained using a each metric Mi into fractional
applying one of the remaining categorization schemes in S to each ranking numbers, which are then normalized into the [0, 1] domain
subset. This results in a hierarchical categorization tree, which defines with 1 being the best and 0 the worst. For example, consider a set of
a taxonomy for the concepts set X . six schemes with metric values:
The ordering of the schemes in S thus determines the taxonomic
(S , 0.5), (S , 0.3), (S , 0.54), (S , 0.8), (S , 0.85), (S , 0.6).
structure of X . It is not difficult to anticipate that many criteria can be 1 2 3 4 5 6
used to determine the ordering for a given concept set. Some criteria
We first sort the set:
will no doubt encode application-specific semantics, and some may be
subjective or debatable. However, there are also some common-sense
(S , 0.3), (S , 0.5), (S , 0.54), (S , 0.6), (S , 0.8), (S , 0.85)
criteria that are generic to most applications. These include: 2 1 3 6 4 5
Coverage. The number of concepts that can be classified by scheme We then obtain the normalized ranking values via the distance for or-
S (i k .e i . s , t a h c e a f p e a w c e it r y in m c e k 0 a ) s , u t r h e e o b f e S tt k e . r. T T h h e e m m o e re as c u o r n e c , e w p h ts ic t h ha i t s S n k or c m an al c iz la e s d si b f y y r d a i n n k al p v o a s r i i t a io b n le f s o f r u e n a c c t h io s n ch σ em = a R . r − − 1 1 where R is the top rank and r is the
the set size X = n, can be defined as:
| |
1 2 3 4 5
M 1 (S k ) = ∑n i=1 max 1 ≤ n j ≤ lk (αi, j,k ) . (1) (S 2 , 0), (S 1 , 5 ), (S 3 , 5 ), (S 6 , 5 ), (S 4 , 5 ), (S 5 , 5 ).
We denote this filter as a function R(S k , Mi , S ). Using the above set
Potential Usage. A categorization scheme that is higher up in the of metrics in conjunction with the filter R, we can derive a combined
taxonomical tree is expected to be used more often in the application metric as
c e o st n im ce a r t n e e t d h . e T p h o e te o n c ti c a u l r u re sa n g c e e o fr f e a qu c e la n s c s i i e fi s ca o t f io c n on s c c e h p e t m s, e µ a i s , f e o n l a lo b w le s: us to M(S k ) = ∑4 1 ωtR(S ∑ k , 4 1 M ω t t (S k ), S ) .
M 2 (S k ) = ∑n i=1 µi ma ∑ x 1 n i= ≤ 1 j ≤ µ l i k (α[i, j, k]) . (2) w ua h l e m re e ω tri t c , s t . = Si 1 m , 2 il , a 3 r , t 4 o a w re ei u g s h e t r s -a in dj c u l s u t s a t b e l r e in w g e a ig lg h o ts ri f th o m r t s h , e th fo e u se r i w n e d i i g v h id ts -
need to be used with care as they introduce additional semantics into
Subtree Balance. Having a balanced node distribution in a tree is a the ordering algorithm.
desirable property of a tree structure. It prevents a tree from having an Equipped with the combined metric M, the algorithm for establish-
excessive height, which corresponds to the need for more visual chan- ing an order of different schemes in S can be described as follows:
nels. Let l denote the number of subclasses in categorization scheme
k
S k , τj be the number of concepts in each subclass ck j , j = 1, 2, . . ., l k and
proc select(S , X )
σ
W
τ
e
a
c
n
a
d
n
τ¯
m
b
e
e
a
t
s
h
u
e
re
st
t
a
h
n
e
d
l
a
e
r
v
d
e
d
l
e
o
v
f
i
b
a
a
ti
l
o
a
n
nc
a
e
nd
as
m
f
e
o
a
ll
n
ow
re
s
s
:
pectively of τ1 , . . .,τlk .
S BEST := null; m BE
≡
ST := 0;
for S S do
∈
m := M(S);
0 ∑ l i k =1 τli = 0 if m > m BEST
M 3 (S k ) = 1 στ < ε(ε > 0) (3) S BEST := S; m BEST := m;
P(τ¯
±
1
|
N τ¯,στ ) τ¯ > 0 & στ > ε out put(S BEST );
remove S BEST from S ;
where P is the probability that a value within [τ¯ − 1,τ¯ + 1] falls under split X into subsetsX1 , X2 , . . ., based on S BEST ;
the curve given by the normal distribution N with (τ¯,στ ) [40]. There if subsets 1
| |≤
are two special cases. When all values of τj are 0, S k cannot classify return;
any concept; hence the metric returns a zero score. When στ = 0, fi
the subtree is totally balanced; hence the metric returns one. As στ for each subsetXk do
approaches zero, the function P becomes numerically unstable, we use select(S , Xi );
a cut-off value ε to prevent this. In this work, we set ε = 0.00001. The od
normal distribution is preferred over a χ-test, as χ may not be reliable fi
when l k is a small number. od.
Number of Subclasses. All visual channels used in glyphs have
limited discriminative capacity. A higher number of subclasses in a 4.2 Application to the Biological Case Study
scheme would require visual encoding to have more codewords (e.g., The biological community has built over the years a comprehensive
more colors or more shape types), which will increase users’ cognitive collection of resources to archive experimental data. As molecular
load in learning, remembering, and recognizing the codewords. It is biology became a more data intensive field with the advent of DNA
thus more desirable to have a smaller number of subclasses, except microarrays, came the need to store not only measurements but also
that a categorization scheme with fewer than 2 sub-classes is useless. ancillary annotation describing experimental conditions and set up,
Let η$ be an up-limit for the number of codewords, which is set to thus ensuring a metadata core always shipped with the data set. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
MAGUIRE ET AL: TAXONOMY-BASED GLYPH DESIGN — WITH A CASE STUDY ON VISUALIZING WORKFLOWS OF… 2607
Table 1. A fragment of the input document passed to the taxonomy gen-
eration algorithm. Schemes are grouped by common names preceding
the semi-colon, e.g. S1:On Material refers to schema 1 and On Material
is the classification.
Process Name Occurrences S1:Material S1:Data ... S6:in vitro S6:in vivo S6:in silico
labeling 390811 1 ... 1
nucleic acid extr. 350267 1 ... 1
hybridization 345671 1 ... 1
feature extr. 267044 1 ... 1
bioassay data trans. 176347 1 ... 1
grow 116194 1 ... 1
pool 68004 1 ... 1
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
sizes of microarray databases (GEO, AE) constitute prime resources
for evaluating and testing our approach [2, 1]. The content of Ar-
rayExpress was therefore accessed obtaining data via parallel calls,
converting 21000 experiments and associated experimental metadata
to ISA-Tab[46, 50]. This step provided a harmonized format in which
to represent not just transcriptomic data, but also genomic, proteomic,
metabolomic and other classical experiment types. Schemes & classifications C1 material perturbation C1 behaviourally induced perturbation C1 in vitro
C2 material combination C2 physically induced perturbation C2 in silico
Given the data sets, the code analyzes the content of these direc- C1 inputs and outputs C3 material amplification C3 material induced perturbation C3 in vivo
t p o e r r i i e m s e t n o ts d , e a te n r d m t i h n e e n t u h m e b p e ro r c o e f s t s i e m s e a s n t d he I y O o s c w cu h r i . ch Th e e xi a s n t a w ly it s h is in re t v h e e a e le x d - C C C 2 1 2 p o on n ro d m ce a a t s t a s e e r s ial C C C C 4 5 1 2 m m d d a a a a t t t t a a e e a p r r i i c r a a e q l l p u s c e o r is o p l i l c t a e i e r o c s a t n s t io i i n o n g n C C C C 1 2 3 4 i i i i n n n n p p p p u u u u t t t t c m c ti e e s o l l s l l u l u e e l c a u r l c a o r m pa p r o t nent C C C C 1 2 3 4 b d c d h e i a o e t v l a m i o c g e ic ic a a l l
C3 data analysis C5 input organ
61 processes (a small number resulting from the homogeneity of the C6 input organism
C7 input population
database where analysis techniques are targeted primarily towards
DNA microarrays) with 1,845,089 occurrences and 8,223 properties
of the sample of which 3492 were deemed to be IOs with 486,353 Fig. 3. The classification algorithm arranged the classification schemes
in the above order.
occurrences.
Several distinct, empirical but meaningful, categorizations were de-
data), however after the top level separation, S1 became redundant as
vised encompassing a number of facets defining the properties of the
a result of the top level implicitly making a split on data (in silico) and
experimental process, either in terms of its participants or in terms of
materials (in vitro and in vivo). The algorithm successfully detected
key process properties. Classifications, based on features such as the
this redundancy; hence S1 is absent from Fig. 3.
nature of process participants, the granularity scale, the nature of ex-
Although the algorithm performed as expected, a possible criticism
periments and common types a treatments applied in biological experi-
of the algorithm could be highlighted in the placement of S5 below
ments were developed. Some classifications were somewhat informed
S4. S5 could have been placed above S4 in line with the observation
by the overall assumptions ISA model relies upon, where nodes can be
that, for the majority of cases, S5 was selected over S4. The reason S5
either material or data files and where edges are processes acting upon
wasn’t used to sub-classify C1 of S4 is due to its number of classifi-
those nodes. Others resulted from applying a small number of axioms
cations (7) being greater than that of S4 (3), therefore S4 was selected
discovered through consultations with domain experts. There were 6
primarily on this metric even though the sub-tree balance of S5 (0.8)
classification schemes in all with a total of 23 sub-classifications, these
was slightly better than that of S4 (0.68). To modify this behavior, it
are detailed in figure 3. Table 4.2 shows a snapshot of the input file
was necessary to involve domain experts in refining the tree based on
used in the classification algorithm.
their domain-specific knowledge and case-specific requirements.
The schemes are not tied to any existing taxonomic tree, may not
be orthogonal and/or may be redundant with respect to others. The
5 VISUAL ENCODING
development of the classifications was not the result of application of
any knowledge engineering methods and there is no ontological com- 5.1 Perceptual Guidance
mitment, although in theory the classification names used could be A glyph is a small visual object composed of a number of visual chan-
derived from an ontological framework. The reason for not relying nels which can be used independently as well as constructively to de-
an ontology in the first place was risk mitigation, where use would al- pict attributes of a data record. Glyphs are of a type of visual signs that
most certainly result in an unbalanced tree as occurrence counts for the can make use of visual features of other types of signs, such as icons,
terms would not be considered, resulting in creation of many glyphs indices and symbols.
that would never be used. Although there are several books on sign design (e.g., [6, 4]), they
The creation of the tree shown in Fig. 3 was a largely iterative focus on signage in public space, and offer empirical guidance on a
quest with continuous involvement of domain experts checking to en- large number of issues including standardization, size, location, illu-
sure that the classifications assigned were meaningful. From early mination and so on. Many of these issues are not quite relevant to the
versions of the classification matrix creation, classifications were re- need for visualizing the workflows of biological experiments. Here,
moved, added or merged in consultation with those who knew the data we draw our design principles mainly from findings in perception, es-
domain. For example, in S2 there were sub-classifications in Genetic pecially in the area of visual search [54, 43].
Modification & Labeling which are types of Material Combination. While the extensive use of signs, icons and pictograms in everyday
Therefore, these sub-classifications were removed since it would be life reflects their usefulness and effectiveness, several perceptual stud-
technically and semantically incorrect to keep them. These early in- ies also directly or indirectly confirmed their perceptual and cognitive
teractions emphasized the importance of having domain experts in the merits. For example, Franks and Bransford’s study on transformation
loop, otherwise classifications and subsequent glyphs would not be as of prototypes [16] suggested that humans can learn to recognize glyphs
well created as they could be. by rules consciously as well as unconsciously. The presence of iconic
The algorithm managed to correctly place the classifications where memory [53] may facilitate rapid comparison between glyphs in the
they were expected (checks were made by hand to ensure that the al- same display, whereas it is less so for texts.
gorithm performed well). Schema S6 (in vitro, in silico and in vivo) Guideline on Semantic Relevance. Bertin [7] classified visual
was the best top level classification due to its overall fitness metric of channels (which he referred to as retinal variables) into two categories,
3.08 with individual metrics found to be: M1 = 1.0; M2 = 1.0; M3 = planar (location) and retinal (size, color, shape, orientation, texture
0.9; and M4 = 0.18. S6 was closely followed by S1 (on material and on and brightness). Bertin proposed four semantic criteria for determin-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
2608 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012
Table 2. Perceptual strength of different visual channels based on levels of organization studied by Bertin[7] and Green[17], ‘popout’ effect studied
extensively in psychology [61, 15, 31, 7, 17, 63, 55, 38, 39], and hierarchy effect studied by Navon [35] and Love [30]. The summary strength of
each channel is estimated and it should be considered in conjunction with application-specific conventions and metaphors.
Visual Levels of Organization Popout Hierarchy Summary Convention
Regions Channels Associative Selective Ordered Quantitative Effect Effect Strength & Metaphor
a) Main 1. Color Yes Yes Yes ***** Strong ***** application
2. Size Yes Yes Yes *** **** specific
3. Shape Yes Yes *** ***
4. Orientation Yes Yes *** ***
5.Texture Yes Yes Yes ** **
b) Supplementary 6-10 (same as 1-5) Medium
11. Planar Yes Yes Yes *** ***
c) Interior Contains (a+b)) Low
ing the suitability of different channels in representing certain types
of information. These semantic criteria are: associative, selective, or- supplementary unused
dered and quantitative. These criteria are important guidelines, though process
there has been disagreement in the literature as to how individual vi- main body S6
sual channels are judged. For example, Bertin considered shape as a S2 & S4
non-selective variable. Research has shown that shapes such as filled interior S3
S5
rectangles, circles and triangles do not allow the human visual sys-
tem to identify one shape from another effectively in a rapid action
when they form some global structures [30, 35], (they have poor “pop-
out” effect). However, the omission of all shapes as a selective visual
Fig. 4. (a) The glyph template with a main body, an interior region and
channel has been challenged, for example, by [56, 57, 17], who show
an exterior region (consisting of 4 sections). (b) Our final design makes
practice and familiarity can support selectivity with almost any shape.
use of the main body and interior region. The exterior is reserved for
Guideline on Channel Composition. As a glyph is likely to fea-
future extension.
ture a number of visual channels, the constructive composition may
affect how individual channels are perceived. A rich collection of lit-
In theory, the exterior and interior regions may also be divided into
erature on integral and separable dimensions shows that the combined
sub-regions in a recursive fashion though in practice this is tightly con-
dissimilarity of closely integrated visual channels exhibits Euclidean
strained or discouraged by the very limited display resolution typically
distance d a 2 + d b 2 [26, 18], whereas that of separable visual chan- available for glyphs. Similar to the design convention for icons, pic-
nels exhib%its city-block distance da + d
b
[10, 51]. The latter is more tograms are normally featured in the interior region. The exterior re-
cost-effective than the former in rule-based encoding of multi-faceted gion may be further divided in four sections (top, bottom, left and
concepts, therefore effective glyph design should encompass a non- right). If glyphs will be connected to form a network or graph (as in
conflicting set of separable retinal variables. this work), the use of these four sections has to take into account the
Guideline on Pop-out Effects. Many classic studies in percep- possible incoming and outgoing connections.
tion also established the “power” of different visual channels in terms Table 2 summarizes relative merits of some of the most commonly-
of pop-out effect (pre-attentive search), and fixation (during attentive used visual channels in different regions according to Bertin’s cate-
search)[19]. The pop-out effect is one which allows identification of gorization, pop-out effects and hierarchy effects. We estimated the
a target within a few nanoseconds of initial exposure to the visual overall discriminating capacity of each channel by using a summary
search space. A result of several milestone studies focusing on ob- rating in the penultimate column. We also recognized the importance
served response times, the ordering of the four commonly used visual of the conventions and metaphors in an application. We will discuss
channels follows the consensus: color size shape orientation visual metaphors further in Section 5.2. We added the last column to
(e.g.,[61, 44, 48]). The symbol read ≺ s as pr ≺ ecedes. ≺ However, the highlight the necessity to consider these in a design process.
strength of color over the other th ≺ ree channels is generally much more It is difficult to establish an accurate ranking order of different vi-
noticeable. sual channels by taking all perceptual effects into account in a quan-
Guideline on Visual Hierarchy. Visual hierarchy, with which the titative manner. The state of the art in perception research is yet to
environment and objects around us are arranged is a well documented provide all evidence needed for a full and conclusive analysis. Nev-
theoretical framework [38, 35, 30, 24, 5]. However, the literature con- ertheless, Table 2 can serve a qualitative guidance to glyph designs in
tains a debate over the ways in which the visual system traverses this this work, providing an ordering of visual channels in parallel with the
hierarchy. There are four possible ways: top-down (also called global ordering of categorization schemes discussed in Section 4.
processing) [35]; bottom-up (also called local processing); middle-out
5.2 Mapping Taxonomy to Visual Channels
[24]; and salient features (e.g., edges, points, colors) [49]. Because
glyphs are relatively small in comparison with a whole visualization, For each scheme in the taxonomic tree as shown in Fig. 3, we propose
we consider at such a “localized level”, the top-down and salient fea- a number of design options. Fig. 5 shows some examples of the pro-
tures may play more significant roles. The top-down assumption sug- posed designs. For example, the first column shows the use of colors
gests that when consider a glyph in isolation, its global feature will to encode the classes of a categorization scheme. The second column
affect visual search more than its local features. Salient features are shows the use abstract shapes. Some options convey an abstraction
partly addressed by the pop-out effects. from pictorial representations of classes, and in other cases, we try
Based on the above-mentioned perceptual guidance, we considered to establish a metaphoric association between a visual channel and a
a generic glyph design template for this work as shown in Fig. 4(a). biological categorization.
The template divides a glyph into three regions, namely main body, Metaphoric visual representations enable domain-specific encoding
exterior and interior. In practice, each region can be divided into 2 using “natural mapping” [52, 36]. This natural mapping can make it
or more sub-regions (e.g., a twin body glyph or 4 exterior sections), easier for users to infer meaning from the glyph with less effort re-
it is convenient to consider the three regions in abstraction. The sep- quired to learn and remember them [33]. A recent study showed that
aration of these regions facilitates the basic separation of visual chan- visual metaphors can aid memorization of the information depicted in
nels based on the composition guideline, while allowing us to consider a visualization [8]. However, the same study also showed that visually
them individually according to the hierarchy guideline. realistic metaphors (those with a lot of detail) may have a negative
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
MAGUIRE ET AL: TAXONOMY-BASED GLYPH DESIGN — WITH A CASE STUDY ON VISUALIZING WORKFLOWS OF… 2609
design option 1 design option 2 design option 3 design option 4 design option 5 design option 6 design option 7
Inputs and S0 | 2 levels
Outputs Design Option 6.
Process
Biological
Device S7 | 4 levels S6 | 3 levels
Design Option 1. Design Option 6.
Chemical
Data more
Not detailed in this example.
S6 > S3 | 3 levels S6 > S2 | 5 levels
In Vitro Design Option 6 Design Option 7
In Vivo
In Silico
S6 > S2 > S4 | 3 levels S6 > S2 > S5 | 7 levels
Data Design Option 5 Design Option 7
Collection
Data
Processing
Data
Analysis
S6 > S2 > S4 > S5 | 7 levels
Material Design Option 7
perturbation
Material
separation Fig. 6. Formation of the final glyph design. Top level items require the
Material greatest visual power. It is important to be able to distinguish each of
amplification the processes based on their parent level in the taxonomy. Distinguish-
Material able global shapes provide the difference between IOs (circles) and pro-
combination
cesses (squares with pointed bottom to indicate directionality).
Material
collection
other schemes in the tree;
Molecule. encoding costs in terms of requirement for pixel resolution.
•
Cellular
Part
This process normally takes a few iterations, during which new
Cell design options and new metaphoric abstractions and associations are
sometimes proposed.
Tissue
Based on the hierarchy in Fig. 3, we considered to use color and
shape options for S0 (IOs vs. processes) and S7 (four classes of IOs).
Organ
As introducing 4 main body shapes to encode IOs is not an effective
Organism mapping for learning and remembering, we decided to assign outline
color of the main body to encode S7, and use two basic shapes, circle
Population and pentagon (a rectangle with a pointer to show workflow direction)
to encode S0. Since the main body or the pentagon will only be col-
ored in black or white, S0 also implicitly encoded in using color sym-
Material
induced bolism, that is, color for IOs and black/white for processes. In effect,
pertubation.
S0 is encoded using two visual channels. This redundancy can serve
Behaviourally
induced as an error detection in visualization [12].
pertubation.
Physically Fig. 6 shows each of the five schemes for the process subtree, and
induced
pertubation. the design option chosen from Fig. 5. Below we discuss our reason-
ing for selecting each of the design options for each scheme in the
taxonomy.
Fig. 5. Experimenting with visual channels: an overview of the various
S6: Process environment. The taxonomic tree suggested a high
design options available for use in representing the different classifica-
priority for visual mapping, which is consistent with the domain ex-
tions. Most schemes for IO categorization are not shown due to space
restriction. perts’ intuition. We took advantage that black color was not used by
S7 for IOs, we assigned a white background to in silico/in computer
impact on performance in visual search. Moreover, realistic visual (related to computational processes), and black to in vivo/in living)
metaphors require a higher pixel resolution, and would lose their dis- and in vitro/in glass (related to materials). Further more, we made use
criminating capacity in low resolution conditions. of a shape-based metaphor, fully-filled background for in vivo (whole
Based on the design options shown in Fig. 5, we followed the taxo- organism), and black background with white cut out for in vitro (com-
nomic tree in Fig. 3 and identified the best option for each scheme in ponent of an organism). Together, this was given in Fig. 5 as design
a hierarchical manner. The evaluation criteria include: option 6. We maintained the overall appearance of the main body of
process glyphs in black and white to avoid potential clash with mate-
the discriminating capacities of different channels (Table 2);
• rial glyphs.
metaphoric capacity for aiding learning and remembering; S2: Types of Material Manipulation. S2 has 5 classes, and we
•
potential conflicts, including spatial, perceptual and metaphoric adopted design option 7, which employs visual metaphors that encap-
•
conflicts, with visual channels that have already been assigned to sulate strong domain-specific meanings. For example, visual symbol
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
2610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012
molecule cellular part cell tissue organ organism population
Fig. 7. Visual representations of the 7 classes in S5.
for the material amplification class depicts a small segment becoming
a large segment.
S4: Type of Experimental Perturbation. S4 defines 3 further sub-
classes of the material perturbation class of S2. Due to the low num-
ber of subclasses, we made use of line styles to modify the diamond
shape of the material perturbation. We made metaphoric association
of three line styles as: “solid” line for physically induced perturbation;
dash line, a common metaphor for uncertainty and unpredictability, for
behaviorally induced perturbation; and wavy line, which is closer to a
circle (a visual signature for IOs), for material induced perturbation.
S5: Levels of Material Granularity. This scheme has 7 subclasses
(molecule, cellular part, cell, tissue, organ, organism and population), 80px 60px 40px 20px 10px 5px
and finding a suitable visual channel was not straightforward. A sim-
plest approach would be to use colors to fill the interior of the glyph,
or to use some shape-based encoding. After consulting the domain
Fig. 9. A “crush” test of glyphs to evaluate the discriminating capacity of
experts, these two options were ruled out. In fact, domain experts
various visual channels at different resolutions.
preferred some pictograms to represent the 7 subclasses. After con-
sidering a number of more realistic drawings, we found that it was not
Source Name Characteristics[Organism] Protocol REF Sample Name Protocol REF Extract Name Label Protocol REF Labeled Extract Name
easy to create realistic representations that can differentiate all sub- source1 saccharomyces cerevisiae grow sample1_grow extraction sample1_extract1 biotin labeling sample1_extract1_lab1
source1 saccharomyces cerevisiae grow sample1_grow extraction sample1_extract2 biotin labeling sample1_extract2_lab1
classes (e.g., cellular part vs. cell; organ vs. organism). We designed
a special set of icons as shown in Fig. 7 with three visual channels
to aid learning, memorization and recognition. The first visual chan-
nel is the overall shape and orientation. The second visual channel is
metaphoric abstraction and association. For example, the shape of cell
part indicates a portion of a cell. Tissue is associated with a patch,
Fig. 10. A workflow is recorded in text form within the ISA-Tab format.
organ with an abstract heart shape, organism with an abstract human,
Our software translates it to glyph-based visualization. A branching
population with two abstract humans. The third visual channel is the
event is automatically detected during the translation.
number of orange sub-shapes, representing the levels 1-7.
S3: Types of Data Manipulation. S3 defines a 3 further sub-
To generate the workflow, we made use of the layout algorithm
classes of the in silico class of S6. We use three abstract pictograms to
available within the Prefuse visualization framework [20]. This frame-
represent data capture, processing and analysis. The encoding makes
work also brings with it functionality such as panning, zooming and
use of the difference in overall shape, orientation, and number of tri-
filtering which bring more interactivity to the user and making naviga-
angles to aid learning, memorization and recognition. Note that these
tion through large collections of workflows easier. The only require-
shapes will not be confused with those for S5 as the white background
ment for use of Prefuse was a minimal amount of Java code to create
of the main body provides a distinct context of computing rather than
the user interface coupled with creation of an XML file format native
IOs.
to Prefuse for representation of the tree structure. This XML format
Following mapping of all schemes to design options, creation of all
is configurable, we have configured it to contain: node type (e.g., pro-
glyphs is a straightforward process. Fig. 8 shows all variations of the
cess), node name (e.g., labeling) and an image to be rendered, which is
glyphs associated with the process sub-tree.
assigned using a look-up operation through the above mentioned tab
We introduced a “crush” test for the designed glyphs by scaling
delimited mapping file. The order of the XML elements within this
it to different pixel resolutions. Fig. 9 shows some example glyphs
file has direct implications on the order these elements are displayed
display at varying resolutions. One can comfortably see all details
in. Within the ISA-Tab format, there is an implicit time element found
at the 40 40 level. At the 10 10 level, one can observe the visual
× × in the ordering of the columns in the study sample and assay files. This
signature of in vivo and in vitro. Even at the lowest level (5 5), one
× can be used to construct the XML elements through near direct map-
can still differentiate the two glyphs.
pings of processes and IOs, a workflow which is illustrated in Fig. 10.
Recognizing branching events is an important part of workflow visu-
6 WORKFLOW VISUALIZATION AND ISA INTEGRATION alization as illustrated in 10. In software, these branch events can be
In order to visualize workflows of biological experiments, we had to identified when the preceding nodes of a process have the same names
address the following technical issues: 1) mapping from a name in the while the succeeding output nodes are different. Fig. 10 highlights
metadata to a glyph; 2) creating a workflow visualization with both one such case, where branching occurs after extraction of 3 materials
node placement and connection display; 3) developing a prototype tool from one sample.
for a practical environment such as the ISA tools framework. Our software reads text-based ISA-Tab files as illustrated to create
The mapping from concept name is achieved by a look-up table the XML notations required by Prefuse for rendering the experiment
which is built from the matrix used in formulating the taxonomic tree workflow illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
and implemented as a tab delimited file. Each concept name is mapped The software is implemented as a Java application capable of pro-
to a text tag encoding the traversal path from the root of the tree to the cessing ISA-Tab files to create experimental workflows using glyphs.
leaf node corresponding to the name. The tag includes identifiers of For the purposes of broad dissemination in the near future, we have in-
the schemes and classes encountered. With the path, a glyph can be tegrated the workflow visualization directly inside ISAcreator, a Java
constructed dynamically from the pre-defined visual mapping as de- desktop application for creating and editing ISA-Tab files. Further-
scribed in the previous section. The look-up table also enables storage more, the standalone workflow visualization shown in figures 11a and
of pre-rendered glyphs in an image format. b makes use of the same ISA-Tab parser as available within ISAcre-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
MAGUIRE ET AL: TAXONOMY-BASED GLYPH DESIGN — WITH A CASE STUDY ON VISUALIZING WORKFLOWS OF… 2611
C1 inputs and outputs C1 behaviourally induced perturbation C1 biological
C2 processes C2 physically induced perturbation C2 device
C C 1 2 o on n d m a a t t a erial C C 1 3 i m np at u e t r m ial o i l n e d c u u c la e r d p p a e rt rturbation C C 3 4 c d h a e ta mical
C2 input cellular component
C1 material perturbation C3 input cell
C2 material combination C4 input tissue
C3 material amplification C5 input organ
C4 material separation C6 input organism
C5 material collection C7 input population
C C C 1 2 3 d d d a a a t t t a a a a p a c n re q a p u ly r i s s o i i c s ti e o s n sing C C C 1 2 3 i i i n n n v s v i i i l t v i r c o o o Schemes & classifications
Fig. 8. Overview of the taxonomy based glyph designs in the context of biodomain.
not expect users to learn and remember these glyphs without help. We
thus allow users to find detailed text descriptions in pop-up windows
interactively. As shown in Fig. 11, not only do these windows pro-
vide names of processes and IOs, they also serve as dynamic legends,
showing how each glyph is decomposed into different elements corre-
sponding to categorization schemes. One can also select a component
to view all classes in a scheme.
In this manuscript, we presented a systematic approach for glyph
design by using taxonomy as a guide. We demonstrated our approach
by analyzing the content of a biological database and showed how our
tree-building algorithm could be used to take a large collection of con-
cepts and generate a taxonomic tree, which provides an ordering of a
set of categorization schemes (i.e., attribute dimensions). This enabled
us to draw a parallel between the ordering of attribute dimensions with
the ordering of visual channels compiled from the perception and visu-
alization literature. We involved domain experts in refining the tree as
well as in creating metaphoric abstraction and association for glyphs.
Fig. 11. User can interact with a workflow to view the text descriptions This work was followed by development of a prototype tool for glyph-
of individual glyphs in pop-up windows, which are also dynamic legends based visualization of experimental design workflows as found in bi-
showing how the concept is categorized and how the corresponding ology. The prototype is integrated in the ISA suite of tools to be dis-
glyph is decomposed into different elementary visual representations. seminated to users.
Users can also use such a legend to find out other classes in a catego- We plan to further the present work to include the provision of
rization scheme.
“macros” in workflows in order to make graphs more compact and
ator. The integration involved the development of user interface el- create dynamic web-based rendering of the workflows using vector
ements for ISAcreator software to access the workflow visualization. graphics. We also intend to carry out field-based evaluation through
From the spreadsheet view, users may highlight rows (assays), right ISAcommons, the user community of ISA-tools framework. Like all
click and select an option named “View workflow for assays” to visu- potential diagrammatic schemes, we expect that it will take many iter-
alize the entire processing pipeline for the corresponding samples as ations before it can become a standard. Nevertheless, the development
shown in Fig. 1(b). of an online visualization tool will make such a process more efficient.
7 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Although it was established in psychology that people can learn rules This work was supported by funding from the BBSRC and NERC,
of glyph encoding consciously as well as unconsciously [16], we do grants BB/I000917/1 and BB/I025840/1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 10 ---
2612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012
REFERENCES [32] E. Maguire. Taxonomy in biology and visualization. http: //isa-
tab.sourceforge.net/docs/publications/Taxonomy.pdf, Jan 2012.
[1] Arrayexpress. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/. [33] S. McDougall, O. De Bruijn, and M. Curry. Exploring the effects of
[2] Gene expression omnibus (geo). http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/. icon characteristics on user performance: The role of icon concreteness,
[3] Graphviz. http://graphviz.org/. complexity, and distinctiveness. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
[4] R. Abdullah and R. Hu¨mber. Pictograms, Icons & Signs: A guide to Applied, 6(4), 2000.
Information Graphics. Thames & Hudson, 2006. [34] P. Muter and D. Mayson. The role of graphics in item selection from
[5] M. Bar. Visual objects in context. Nature reviews. Neuroscience, menus. Behaviour and Information Technology, 5:89–95, 1986.
5(8):617–629, 2004. [35] D. Navon. Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in visual
[6] P. Barker and J. Fraser. Sign design guide: a guide to inclusive signage. perception. Cognitive psychology, 9(3):353–736, 1977.
JMU and Sign Design Society, 2000. [36] D. A. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books, 2002.
[7] J. Bertin. Semiology of graphics: diagrams, networks, maps. University [37] H. Ogata, S. Goto, K. Sato, W. Fujibuchi, H. Bono, and M. Kanehisa.
of Wisconsin press, 1983. Kegg: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. NAR, 27(1), 1999.
[8] R. Borgo, A. Abdul-Rahman, F. Mohamed, P. W. Grant, I. Reppa, [38] S. Palmer. Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. Cognitive
L. Floridi, and M. Chen. An empirical study on using visual embellish- Psychology, 9(4):441–915, 1977.
ments in visualization. to appear in IEEE Transactions on Visualization [39] D. Parkhurst, K. Law, and E. Niebur. Modeling the role of salience in the
and Computer Graphics, 2012. allocation of overt visual attention. Vision research, 42(1), 2002.
[9] R. Bourqui and M. Westenberg. Visualizing temporal dynamics at the [40] J. K. Patel and C. B. Read. Handbook of the Normal Distribution. Marcel
genomic and metabolic level. Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Information Visuali- Dekker, 2nd edition, 1996.
sation, pages 317–322, 2009. [41] J. W. Pellegrino, R. R. Rosinski, H. L. Chiesi, and A. Siegel. Picture-word
[10] B. Burns, B. E. Shepp, D. McDonough, and W. K. Wiener-Ehrlich. The differences in decision latency: An analysis of single and dual memory
relation between stimulus analyzability and perceived dimensional struc- models. Memory and Cognition, 5:383–396, 1977.
ture. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, pages 77–115, 1978. [42] F. Post, T. Walsum, F. Post, and D. Silver. Iconic techniques for feature
[11] Y. Cai, M. L. Wilson, and J. Peccoud. Genocad for igem: a grammatical visualization. Proc. IEEE Visualization, pages 288–295, 1995.
approach to the design of standard-compliant constructs. Nucleic Acids [43] P. Quinlan. Visual feature integration theory: past, present, and future.
Res, 38(8):2637–44, May 2010. Psychological bulletin, 129(5):643–716, 2003.
[12] M. Chen and H. Ja¨nicke. An information-theoretic framework for visu- [44] P. Quinlan and G. Humphreys. Visual search for targets defined by
alization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, combinations of color, shape, and size: an examination of the task con-
16(6):1206–1215, 2010. straints on feature and conjunction searches. Perception & psychophysics,
[13] M. Chuah and S. Eick. Information rich glyphs for software management 41(5):455–527, 1987.
data. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 18:24–29, 1998. [45] W. Ribarsky, E. Ayers, and J. Eble. Glyphmaker: creating customized
[14] T. Czauderna, C. Klukas, and F. Schreiber. Editing, validating and trans- visualizations of complex data. Computer, 27:57–64, 1994.
lating of sbgn maps. Bioinformatics, 26(18):2340–2341, 2010. [46] P. Rocca-Serra, E. Maguire, S.-A. Sansone, and et al. Isa software suite:
[15] J. Duncan and G. Humphreys. Visual search and stimulus similarity. Psy- supporting standards-compliant experimental annotation and enabling cu-
chological review, 96(3):433–491, 1989. ration at the community level. Bioinformatics, 26(18), 2010.
[16] J. Franks and J. Bransford. Abstraction of visual patterns. Journal of [47] Rohrer and et al. The shape of shakespeare: visualizing text using implicit
experimental psychology, 90(1):65–139, 1971. surfaces. In Proc. IEEE Visualization, pages 121–129, 1998.
[17] M. Green. Toward a perceptual science of multidimensional data visual- [48] T. Ropinski, S. Oeltze, and B. Preim. Survey of glyph-based visualization
ization: Bertin and beyond. ERGO/GERO Human Factors Science, 1998. techniques for spatial multivariate medical data. Computers & Graphics,
[18] S. Handelt and S. Imai. The free classification of analyzable and unana- 35(2):392 – 401, 2011.
lyzable stimuli. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 12(1):108–224, [49] D. E. Rumelhart. A multicomponent theory of the perception of briefly
1972. exposed visual displays. Journal of Math. Psych., 7(2):191–218, 1970.
[19] C. G. Healey and J. T. Enns. Attention and visual memory attention and [50] S.-A. Sansone, P. Rocca-Serra, D. Field, E. Maguire, and et al. Toward
visual memory in visualization and computer graphics. IEEE Transac- interoperable bioscience data. Nat Genet, 44(2):121–6, 2012.
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(7):1170–1188, 2011. [51] R. Shepard. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space.
[20] J. Heer, S. K. Card, and J. A. Landay. prefuse: A toolkit for interactive Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1(1):54–141, 1964.
information visualization. In Proc. ACM CHI, pages 421–430, 2005. [52] H. Siirtola. The effect of data-relatedness in interactive glyphs. In Proc.
[21] K. Hemenway. Psychological issues in the use of icons in command 9th Int. Conf. Information Visualization, 2002.
menus. In Proc. ACM CHI, pages 20–23, 1982. [53] G. Sperling. The information available in brief visual presentations. Psy-
[22] B. H. Junker, C. Klukas, and F. Schreiber. Vanted: A system for ad- chological Monographs: General and Applied, 74(11):1–29, 1960.
vanced data analysis and visualization in the context of biological net- [54] K. T. Spoehr and S. W. Lehmkuhle. Visual Information Processing. W.
works. BMC Bioinformatics, 2006. H. Freeman & Company, 1982.
[23] A. Karve and M. Gleicher. Glyph-based overviews of large datasets in [55] A. Treisman. Focused attention in the perception and retrieval of multidi-
structural bioinformatics. In Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Information Visualiza- mensional stimuli. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 22(1), 1977.
tion, Supplements, pages 1–6, 2007. [56] A. Treisman and S. Gormican. Feature analysis in early vision: evidence
[24] R. Kinchla and J. Wolfe. The order of visual processing: ”top-down,” from search asymmetries. Psychol Rev, 95(1):15–48, Jan 1988.
”bottom-up”, or ”middle-out”. Perception & psychophysics, 25(3), 1979. [57] Q. Wang, P. Cavanagh, and M. Green. Familiarity and pop-out in visual
[25] G. Kindlmann and C.-F. Westin. Diffusion tensor visualization with glyph search. Percept Psychophys, 56(5):495–500, Nov 1994.
packing. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, [58] M. O. Ward. Multivariate data glyphs: Principles and practice. In Hand-
12(5):1329–1335, 2006. book of Data Visualization, pages 179–198. 2008.
[26] D. Krantz and A. Tversky. Similarity of rectangles: An analysis of sub- [59] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan
jective dimensions. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 12(1), 1975. Kaufmann, 2004.
[27] R. Krishnapuram and K. Kummamuru. Automatic taxonomy generation: [60] S. Wiedenbeck. The use of icons and labels in an end user application
Issues and possibilities. In Proc. IFSA 2003, LNCS, pages 184–195, 2003. program: an empirical study of learning and retention. Behavior and
[28] N. Le Nove`re, M. Hucka, H. Mi, S. Moodie, and et al. The systems Information Technology, 18(2):68–82, 1999.
biology graphical notation. Nat Biotechnol, 27(8), 2009. [61] L. Williams. The effects of target specification on objects fixated during
[29] J. P. Lewis and R. Rosenholtz. VisualIDs: Automatic distinctive icons visual search. Acta psychologica, 27:355–415, 1967.
for desktop interfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 23(3):416–423, [62] C. Wittenbrink, A. Pang, and S. Lodha. Glyphs for visualizing uncer-
2004. tainty in vector field. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
[30] B. Love, J. Rouder, and E. Wisniewski. A structural account of global Graphics, 2:266–279, 1996.
and local processing. Cognitive psychology, 38(2):291–607, 1999. [63] J. Wolfe, K. Cave, and S. Franzel. Guided search: an alternative to the
[31] S. Luck and S. Hillyard. Electrophysiological correlates of feature anal- feature integration model for visual search. Journal of experimental psy-
ysis during visual search. Psychophysiology, 31(3):291–308, 1994. chology. Human perception and performance, 15(3):419–452, 1989.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Bernd Froehlich. Downloaded on August 01,2024 at 07:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
